[Amit Varma]: What do people want? What are people like? What are the values and desires that drive
[Amit Varma]: all of us? Some of us spend our lives trying to figure out these vital aspects of the human
[Amit Varma]: condition. This is what art is supposed to do. And this is also what advertisers try
[Amit Varma]: to do. Their job is to sell products and services. But you can't sell something to a consumer
[Amit Varma]: without understanding the consumer. In the case of the ad man, this quest for understanding
[Amit Varma]: may arise from self-interest, and it may lead to empathy and insight.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Ambi Parameswaran, a legend of the
[Amit Varma]: advertising world and an author of many books that both describe our society and teach the
[Amit Varma]: individuals within the society to lead better lives. Ambi's latest book is called Spring,
[Amit Varma]: Bouncing Back from Rejection and contains lessons on how to react to rejection with
[Amit Varma]: many anecdotes thrown in from his own career and the lives of others. His other books are
[Amit Varma]: also a delight to read. For God's sake is about the business of religion in India. Sponge
[Amit Varma]: is a book about leadership. And my favorite is Nawab's Nudes Noodles, which sheds light
[Amit Varma]: on India and Indian society through the prism of Indian advertising. I've had one ad man
[Amit Varma]: on my show before. Santosh Desai joined me last year for episode 137 of the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen to discuss Indian society over the last 30 years. My conversation with Ambi
[Amit Varma]: turned out to be quite as wide ranging. Before we get to it, though, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. If you enjoy listening to the scene and the unseen, you can play a part in keeping
[Unknown]: the show alive. The scene and the unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe and hopefully
[Unknown]: yours as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much
[Unknown]: money off the show. Although the scene and the unseen has great numbers, advertisers
[Unknown]: haven't really woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. And I do many, many hours
[Unknown]: of deep research for each episode. Besides all the logistics of producing the show myself,
[Unknown]: scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well,
[Unknown]: I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going. And that involves you. My proposition
[Unknown]: for you is this. For every episode of the scene and the unseen that you enjoy, buy me
[Unknown]: a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading
[Unknown]: over to seen unseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription.
[Unknown]: The scene and the unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seen unseen
[Unknown]: dot i n. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep this thing going. seen unseen dot
[Unknown]: i n slash support. Ambi, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. It's such a delight to be on your fantastic show. Thank you very much
[Guest]: for having me.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's absolutely my honor. And it's a bit overdue. And as you, you know, as you'd be
[Amit Varma]: aware of from my show, when we begin rather than jump to the book at hand, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I was very excited to read your new book spring and I thoroughly enjoyed it. But before we
[Amit Varma]: get to that, I also I want to talk a little bit about your, you know, your earlier life,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how did you get to what you're doing now? Because the journey is really, you know,
[Amit Varma]: fascinating all the way from room 224 at Godavari hostel in IIT Madras to you know, where your
[Amit Varma]: next door neighbor had the only genuine Levi's jeans in Madras. So you claim and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: here we are almost, you know, 40 years later. So tell me a bit about your journey and how
[Amit Varma]: you went from IIT IIM to advertising to what you're doing now.
[Guest]: You know, when I was, you know, those days, 19, whatever, 1975, 76, I was, in fact, thinking
[Guest]: of doing a charter, I mean, my dad had a business, which my grandfather had started. So I didn't
[Guest]: want to get into that. I thought I'll do chartered accountancy. And I used to be very impressed
[Guest]: with an uncle who used to come dressed in white and white and come and meet my grandfather.
[Guest]: So I said, I'll become a chartered accountant, you know, like very impressive stuff. And,
[Guest]: you know, I, after my 10th standard, I had to do one year of PUC, what we call pre-university,
[Guest]: you know, it's a one year course in Chennai or Madras. And so I was filling up the form.
[Guest]: And when I was filling the form, I put what is called third group, which is economic commerce
[Guest]: and maths, right? So my dad walked up and said, I was filling up the form for the Loyola
[Guest]: College, you know, so I was hoping to get good marks and get into Loyola. So, and my
[Guest]: dad said, do first group. So I said, why first group? He said, you know, you do first group,
[Guest]: then you can go to IIT. So I said, okay. He said, IIT is good, you go there. Okay. I mean,
[Guest]: I'm clueless, man. I mean, it's completely clueless, you know, reading my James Hadley
[Guest]: Chase and Arthur Haley and all that crap. So I filled up first group. And in my class
[Guest]: of 30 students in my school, I was probably the two or three of us who went to Loyola.
[Guest]: The others went to what is known as the Brahmin College, which is the Vivekananda. So I went
[Guest]: to Loyola. And in the first day or second day of class, some of the guys I got to know,
[Guest]: I met a whole lot of new people there. And they said, yeah, what do you plan to do after
[Guest]: this? So I said, I want to go to IIT. So they said, oh, you started preparing. I said, what
[Guest]: do you mean preparing? I had no idea that there was an entrance exam and one had to
[Guest]: prepare for that stuff. But anyway, to cut a long story short, I managed to get into
[Guest]: IIT Madras. And those days, IIT was a five-year course. So we had a terrific five years of
[Guest]: immersion in IIT.
[Guest]: But around the third year, I realized that this is too heavy for me. I mean, I was not
[Guest]: really cut out for heavy duty. Actually, my mistake was, if I had enjoyed calculus and
[Guest]: high-end mathematics, maybe I would have stayed in IIT in the engineering field. But I somehow
[Guest]: started developing a bit of an aversion to maths and to calculus. So there was an opportunity
[Guest]: to go abroad, which I kind of ducked. And of course, I tried getting a job. And in the
[Guest]: spring, I narrated the story how I blew that interview. And then fortunately, I got into
[Guest]: IIM Calcutta and I went there. And it was a whole world. I mean, I found subjects which
[Guest]: I could enjoy reading. So I actually became... I was probably in the third quartile of my
[Guest]: class. I mean, I was not in the top, not in the second, maybe not really at the bottom,
[Guest]: but somewhere in the third quartile. And I thought I will do okay in MBA school, but
[Guest]: it turned out I actually did very well. So my first year at IIM Cal was pretty good.
[Guest]: And I was among the top few people in the class. And then I narrated the story in spring
[Guest]: how I went for a summer project interview with Indusan Lever. And I went through various
[Guest]: rounds. And then I was called for the final interview with two people, me and another
[Guest]: guy. And we were asked this question. We were given a watch and told, try and sell this
[Guest]: to me. And I gave a very long-winded, logical argument, saying this watch, you're a manager,
[Guest]: you need the watch, plan for time, blah, blah, blah. And my friend who got the job said,
[Guest]: thank you, sir, for giving me the watch. If you want it back, you have to pay me for it.
[Guest]: And he got the assignment very rightly. And that time, I said, look, what's going on?
[Guest]: I mean, I blew the Indusan Lever interview in IIT. Now I've blown it again. I mean, why
[Guest]: am I chasing what everyone is chasing? So I said, for the next two, three months, summer
[Guest]: assignment, I will look for a Calcutta assignment. I want to go around Calcutta, taste the food,
[Guest]: et cetera, in Calcutta. So I discovered it was a small, that time it was a small agency
[Guest]: called Rediffusion coming for an interview. I applied to Rediffusion and I managed to
[Guest]: land that. I think I was the only guy who applied for a summer internship, and I got
[Guest]: it. And I discovered advertising at that time. So that's how I went from engineering to management,
[Guest]: management to advertising. And I think probably I was the first engineer, IIT engineer, MBA
[Guest]: to get into advertising at that time, 1979. And again, in my final year, I was getting
[Guest]: ready for final placement and I had applied again for Indusan Lever and Rediffusion called
[Guest]: me and said, look, are you interested? This offer was technically made in the New Kenilworth
[Guest]: Hotel bar. And at the interview, I said, is it an interview? He said, no, it's not an
[Guest]: interview. You want to join? Tell us now. I said, yeah, I'm interested. We spent two
[Guest]: hours chatting about other things. The next day was the Indusan Lever interview. So I
[Guest]: had to appear for the interview because my placement rep said, look, if you applied,
[Guest]: you have to appear. So I said, no, I don't want to appear. I want to go into advertising.
[Guest]: And so he said, then you need to show a letter. You need to bring a letter and show it to
[Guest]: us that you actually have a job. Otherwise, Indusan Lever will ask us, why is this guy
[Guest]: not coming for an interview? So fortunately, in spite of poor telephone lines, fax connection,
[Guest]: et cetera, I managed to get the letter and I entered advertising.
[Guest]: So from engineering, entering engineering itself was a bit of a diversion. Engineering
[Guest]: to management, management to advertising. And when I got into advertising, Amit, I enjoyed
[Guest]: it so much. For three years, I was there in Rediffusion. I really enjoyed it. I used to
[Guest]: work every day, morning, evening, night, Saturdays, Sundays. And then I said, look, this is life,
[Guest]: man. I mean, this is fantastic. But I said, am I missing something? Should I be doing
[Guest]: something else? And that's when I said, look, maybe I should get into marketing.
[Guest]: And fortunately for me, I got an offer to enter marketing and I spent five plus two,
[Guest]: seven years in marketing and sales. And then I came back into advertising. So this is the
[Guest]: long kind of me. And then I spent probably 26 years in Ulka and Ulka became FCB Ulka.
[Guest]: And before I joined Ulka, in fact, I met Alec Padamsee, the one and only Alec Padamsee and
[Guest]: he spoke for about two hours, gave me a bit of a headache. But he said I was making a
[Guest]: colossal mistake joining Ulka because he said Ulka is going to shut down. My boy, Ulka is
[Guest]: shutting down. So I said, sir, I've got an offer and I want to go to Chennai. I want
[Guest]: to work in Chennai. So he said, my boy, you're making a mistake of your life. I said, so
[Guest]: be it. And interestingly, since we are chatting here, when Ulka's founder passed away, Bal
[Guest]: Mundkur, Alec was there at the condolence meeting to give a little talk and he spoke
[Guest]: very warmly about Bal Mundkur and how Bal Mundkur set up Ulka, which became an institution
[Guest]: is now FCB Ulka and FCB Ulka is so successful, etc., etc. And at the end of that, I went
[Guest]: up to him and said, Alec, I don't think you'll remember, but in 1989, you told me Ulka will
[Guest]: shut down and you told me not to join Ulka. So he looks at me and says, good, you didn't
[Guest]: take my advice. So it's been a good ride. And then I left Ulka in 2016. I'm doing my
[Guest]: own coaching, consulting, mentoring and that kind of stuff. So that's been good.
[Amit Varma]: Very fascinating story. And I actually what I, you know, I mean, there are different parts
[Amit Varma]: of this I want to ask you about and examine. And your journey through advertising has also
[Amit Varma]: been marvelous. You sort of wrote a lot about it in Nawab's Noodles and Noodles as well.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll take you back even before that. I get people from various generations on my
[Amit Varma]: show. And I've noticed that, you know, we often take it for granted that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: our experiences of growing up and the way we grew up is something that is so normalized
[Amit Varma]: in our minds that it's not a big deal. But actually, you know, I realized that the way
[Amit Varma]: I grew up as a kid in the 1980s, for example, was just to see change from how kids are growing
[Amit Varma]: up today, where they have access to all the music, all the literature, everything they
[Amit Varma]: want is just a click away, communication is easy. A friend of mine said a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing a few years back, he said that, you know, this generation will never know what
[Amit Varma]: it is like to be lost, you know, just in the sheer the physical value of having a GPS system.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd also like you to talk a little bit about your childhood in the late 60s. And
[Amit Varma]: then even in the 70s, in the sense of, you know, what is your day like? What kind of
[Amit Varma]: books did you read growing up? What kind of music did you listen to? What kind of intellectual
[Amit Varma]: influences were coming in? And how did those shape you? I mean, one imagines on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand that IIT IIM is still even in the modern time, a very sort of aspirational path to
[Amit Varma]: take for many people, for good reason. But, you know, one can imagine that at that time,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the way you describe how you almost kind of, you know, wandered into it, not realizing
[Amit Varma]: how much you have to prep for an IIT or whatever. So tell me a bit about, you know, the teenage
[Guest]: Ambi as it were.
[Guest]: Well, you know, I mean, we used to, you know, I studied in a school called Vidya Mandir,
[Guest]: which was in Mylapore, which was like a walking distance from my house, you know, it's a nice
[Guest]: 20-20-25 minute walk from my house. And it was a very, very kind of a Brahmin school,
[Guest]: a small size, 30 students per class, and only one section. So everyone knew everyone, right?
[Guest]: I mean, my brother was three years my junior and the Krishnamachari Shrikant, Chika, we
[Guest]: call him, Chika was his batchmate. And, you know, like this, you know, people across all
[Guest]: the classes and all that. It's a very cozy kind of a school, right? I mean, teachers
[Guest]: were like, you, my mother will meet the teacher in the temple or in the sari shop, and you
[Guest]: know, you know each other. And so it's very, I mean, we still have a very active WhatsApp
[Guest]: group of this gang. And we actually met three, four times the last, you know, two years.
[Guest]: So it was, studies were very easy, right? And so I was not a great sportsman, I was
[Guest]: not very good at sports, but I used to read a lot. So we used to be members of every possible
[Guest]: library in that area. So we are a member of the British Council, we used to go and pick
[Guest]: up books from there. We used to go to the USIS library to pick up books from there.
[Guest]: There was also a legendary lending library called Eastbury Lending Library. It still
[Guest]: exists in Chennai. So we used to go and pick up comics and books from there. And so we
[Guest]: used to read a lot. And I remember, you know, we used to read from, of course, from Enid
[Guest]: Blyton, we graduated to Alasdair Maclean. Alasdair Maclean was a huge favorite of ours.
[Guest]: And we went to the guy who wrote Hotel. And I mean, we used to read a hell of a lot of,
[Guest]: you know, this kind of books. And we also, I mean, we also very fond of Billy Bunter.
[Guest]: I don't know why, but Billy Bunter was a big favorite. And there was a government library
[Guest]: called the Central Library. And someone discovered that Central Library has a lot of Billy Bunters.
[Guest]: So we actually went and became a member of Central Library, paying that five rupees or
[Guest]: something. And then we used to go by cycle and pick up. So it was almost like a dreamlike
[Guest]: existence. You know, every one of us had a cycle. So get on to the cycle and say, you
[Guest]: know, you've read this, I've read this. Okay, let's go and explore. And we used to read
[Guest]: a lot of these kind of, of course, comics were there. As you remember, there was no
[Guest]: TV, right? Those days, no TV. We used to listen to, there was a Radio Kuwait, which used to
[Guest]: come in the night. And we used to listen to rock, you know, pop music and rock music on
[Guest]: Radio Kuwait, which used to be Beatles and, you know, stuff like that. And of course,
[Guest]: Bina Ka Geet Mala used to be there. We used to listen to Bina Ka Geet Mala. There was
[Guest]: no TV. Cinema was a regular every week. There was some cinema, we used to go to English
[Guest]: movies, as well as Tamil movies. And I think in the 10th standard, I started watching Hindi
[Guest]: movies. And I still remember, but you know, no one seems to remember this, that, you know,
[Guest]: at once I remember college, school had this project where you sit and work on some projects
[Guest]: and all that. There were no classes. I remember a friend of mine and I jumped over the back
[Guest]: wall of the school and went and saw Johnny Mera Naam, first day for show, something,
[Guest]: you know, maybe I'm just deluded, but, but, you know, we used to go and watch those kinds
[Guest]: of things. You know, no internet, no mobile, no TV, even. Life was so much simpler, you
[Guest]: know, for us, you know, growing up was so much simpler, you know, and cricket was fantastic.
[Guest]: You never got tickets. And I remember you get a match, test match ticket for five days.
[Guest]: People go for one, one day. So my first experience of going for a test match was the day Ken
[Guest]: Barrington played the whole day and scored 25 runs, right? And Bapu Natkarni bowled 25
[Guest]: maiden overs on a trot. Can you imagine? I was there sitting in the stadium watching
[Guest]: that stuff. And it was difficult to get those tickets, right? You got the tickets, you went
[Guest]: there for one day and you share it with your cousin. And then, and then the school punished
[Guest]: all of us who went out to watch the match. So we had to write imposition or something
[Guest]: like that. So it was a very different life. I mean, I'm feeling nostalgic, but if you
[Guest]: move any of today's children into that life, you know, they will, you know, they're going
[Guest]: to kill you, you know, but we enjoyed it. We had a great time. But the widening of reading
[Guest]: actually happened in IIT. School was still pretty narrow. You know, we used to read a
[Guest]: bit of nonfiction, but not too much. But it's in IIT that you suddenly opened up, you started
[Guest]: reading, you know, Aldous Huxley and Somerset Maugham and Fritz Capra and, you know, Godel
[Guest]: and Scherbach and, you know, stuff like that. You suddenly started opening up, which is
[Guest]: why I think IIT is a rare institution because it really opens up your mind to so many things
[Guest]: and so many concepts. And we had a fantastic library in IIT. And even in IIT, we used to
[Guest]: get onto the bike and go to a British council to pick up books. And we used to do that.
[Guest]: And I know friends of mine who discovered James Joyce, read all his books. We discovered
[Guest]: Atlas Shrugged and, you know, what are the other one? Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged
[Guest]: was a very, very popular book in the 79, 80 period. So it's really IIT, which opened up
[Guest]: my desire to read more and more of different genres, you know, not really school. School
[Amit Varma]: was more fiction. Yeah. And in fact, you know, you've also written in one of your books about
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, your roommate in IIT at the Godavari Hostel introduced you to Dark Side
[Amit Varma]: of the Moon. So all of you would sort of gather around and listen to that. And Pink Floyd
[Amit Varma]: was also, of course, a college staple when I was sort of in college in the 90s, though
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't much into them per se. And it strikes me as almost so, like if you had to pick one
[Amit Varma]: day of test cricket to watch, it would really have to be Bapu Nadkarni bowling to Ken Barrington
[Amit Varma]: because Nadkarni was the kind of guy who could bowl 40 overs and give two runs. And Barrington
[Amit Varma]: was the kind of guy who is totally believable that he could bat all day and make 25. So
[Amit Varma]: those two are quite a deadly combination. Now you mentioned that, you know, when you
[Amit Varma]: like, first of all, advertising in those days was not a glamour profession. It was slightly
[Amit Varma]: infradig and you've spoken about how your friends asked you that, you know, you are
[Amit Varma]: a IIT, IIM, why are you going into advertising? And, but you said that you enjoyed it enormously.
[Amit Varma]: So elaborate a bit on those early years. What about it did you enjoy? What part of the work
[Amit Varma]: was fun? Was it sort of the sense of new challenges every day, the creativity that came with it?
[Amit Varma]: Was it that sort of sense of having to look closer at your own society? Because advertising
[Amit Varma]: after all is about selling things to people and you need to understand the people first.
[Amit Varma]: What about advertising? Did you enjoy so much in those early years?
[Guest]: I think, you know, I was prepared for it. So I knew it was hard work. But you know,
[Guest]: those days, advertising was a much smaller business. So you did not have department like
[Guest]: client servicing and account planning and media planning. So Rediffusion had a unique
[Guest]: way that because they hired all these so-called high caliber IIM guys, you know, client servicing,
[Guest]: account planning, media planning, all three were done by us. So the only the media releases
[Guest]: were done by the guys, but we used to do it. So it was a lot of, you know, what we call
[Guest]: job enrichment. It was a very, very rich and potent job. So I, at one time, remember working
[Guest]: on five different accounts. One was a cigarette brand called Red and White Cigarette. The
[Guest]: other was a industrial product company called Thermax. Third was a sari company called Khatau
[Guest]: Saris. Fourth was computers, which was, you know, ICL or ICIM computers. And fifth was
[Guest]: Xerox. Imagine, maybe I'm forgetting caliber, suitings, and maybe one more. You know, look
[Guest]: at the variety of products. So it was such a rich experience. So every single, and then
[Guest]: of course, I worked on this fabulous brand called Apella. I've written about it in the
[Guest]: book, right? The apple drink from Cadbury. So I had six or seven exciting accounts. Each
[Guest]: was different. Each had a different consumer. So one had to understand the boiler buyer,
[Guest]: you know, versus a soft drink buyer, was a cigarette buyer. So we used to, I used to
[Guest]: look at research across these six, seven types of consumers, analyze them, then write the
[Guest]: brief, sit with the producer, sit with the creative team, get the creative out. I mean,
[Guest]: I was a bottom rung, but I was reporting to the branch director. I was a one-year-old
[Guest]: trainee, but I was reporting to the branch director. And he and I used to go for meetings.
[Guest]: And I remember, he used to let me make presentations. Those days, presentations are done with these
[Guest]: handwritten charts, you know. So one had to sit and write those charts and carry them
[Guest]: rolled up to, I remember one particular presentation. This was to Karthikeya Sarabhai. He's still
[Guest]: a friend.
[Guest]: So we were presenting a campaign for a brand of adhesives, which they had called Cali Bond.
[Guest]: But we as an agency could not figure out what to do. So I went through the presentation
[Guest]: and we presented the first idea, second idea, third idea, fourth idea, fifth idea, sixth
[Guest]: idea, seventh idea, tenth idea. At which stage, Karthikeya stopped and said, hey guys, are
[Guest]: you trying to tell me that we should not advertise this product? So we said, yeah, you got it.
[Guest]: So because he said, look, you guys come and recommend one idea. The fact that you're recommending,
[Guest]: you know, you're saying 10 ideas, which means you're confused. I said, yes, Karthikeya,
[Guest]: we're fully confused. We don't know how to market this product. And that time, you know,
[Guest]: Favicol was still quite strong. But we said, look, this is going to be very difficult.
[Guest]: Just by advertising, nothing's going to happen. You know, start going and meeting carpenters
[Guest]: and start selling it there.
[Guest]: So every single client, every single brand, one was deeply immersed. And whatever reason,
[Guest]: though Radio Fusion was seen as a very hot creative agency, they also had this reputation
[Guest]: of MBAs, you know, very high quality MBAs working with them. You know, they had guys
[Guest]: from IIM Ahmedabad, IIM Bangalore. No, no, actually, IIM Ahmedabad, IIM Cal, FMS Delhi,
[Guest]: all these kind of really top class guys working there. So we had a lot of, you know, respect
[Guest]: from the client. We used to listen to a lot of things, what we say. So it was thoroughly
[Guest]: enjoyable. And which is why, you know, for two and a half, three years, I was there.
[Guest]: I really enjoyed my stint there and in the world of advertising. So actually, when I
[Guest]: went from advertising to marketing, I remember Arun Nanda, Managing Director of Radio Fusion
[Guest]: telling me, Ambi, you're going into a multinational company in the marketing role. Please don't
[Guest]: get bored too early. So I said, what do you mean? He said, look here, you've been working
[Guest]: morning, evening, night. You know, the life of a brand manager actually is a little boring.
[Guest]: You just take it easy. Slowly you'll enjoy that work. And they never tried to stop me
[Guest]: from going. They said, yeah, you've got a good break, go. But, you know, be careful
[Guest]: of a few things, you know, don't be impatient and don't be in a hurry to do things. You
[Guest]: know, the multinationals work very slowly, work very differently. It'll be good for you
[Guest]: to learn how they work. So, I mean, advertising was great fun. And of course, you know, the
[Guest]: other crazy thing in Radio Fusion was really crazy. We didn't have a film manager, right?
[Guest]: And therefore, we guys used to, the account executives, used to do negotiations with film
[Guest]: producers, sit with film producers. I remember, oh shit, this is a crazy story. You know,
[Guest]: we had done our first television ad for Red and White Cigarettes. And Ravi Chopra got,
[Guest]: may he rest in peace, he was the director of that film. And Red and White hero was a
[Guest]: young aspiring actor called Raj Babbar. This was before Insaaf Ka Taraz Hua. He was a really
[Guest]: unknown guy then. So those days, films had to be presented in a double header in a cinema,
[Guest]: you know, in a mini theater. So it was presented to us. And it somehow didn't have the, you
[Guest]: know, it was a little simple story. A little kid is playing with a ball, the ball runs
[Guest]: onto the middle of the road, and a truck is coming. It's almost hitting the kid. And our
[Guest]: man, hero, Red and White man, jumps and saves the kid. And when the lady mother looks for
[Guest]: the kid, he is gone. You know, he's, you know, Red and White peene walon ki baati kuch aur
[Guest]: hai. You know, that was a line written by Kamlesh Pandey, the one and only Kamlesh Pandey.
[Guest]: So, you know, imagine the film is presented. We're all sitting there. And this really happened.
[Guest]: It's a crazy story. So you're all sitting there and the film was not working, you know.
[Guest]: So we were saying, boss, Ravi, and Goofy Paenthal, who later became very famous as Shakuni Mama,
[Guest]: right? So Goofy was, you know, Ravi's assistant. So Goofy and Ravi, I said, look, boss, it's
[Guest]: not working. And my boss Vish said, it's not working. Kamlesh Pandey said, ah, not working.
[Guest]: So then I said, look, maybe we need to re-edit it. So Ravi Chopra said, Ambi, you want to
[Guest]: give it a shot? So I said, yeah. So I went to their, you know, editing lab and I sat
[Guest]: with Goofy and I re-edited the film with the editor. And, you know, I'd learned, you know,
[Guest]: because I'd learned some tricks working with other directors like Prahlad. So I said, look,
[Guest]: let's chop it into small shots and create the excitement. And it worked. You know, I
[Guest]: re-edited the film with the editor, showed it to Goofy and showed it to Ravi Chopra.
[Guest]: They said, yeah, we are okay with this. If you're okay. I said, okay, let me go and take
[Guest]: it and sell it to the agency. And we went and sold it to the agency and said, yeah,
[Guest]: fine, let's take it to the client. So look at the kind of opportunity you have those
[Guest]: days, you know, because of lack of specialization, you know, today an account executive or account
[Guest]: supervisor may not even know how a film is edited, let alone sit with the editor and
[Guest]: actually edit it, you know? So, and I keep telling, you know, my own people, we used
[Guest]: to, you know, I used to hire people and I used to tell them, get involved, get involved
[Guest]: in every stage of the advertising process, you know? So those days we got involved and
[Guest]: we really enjoyed it. You know, that, that was the fun aspect of the, of the job, you
[Amit Varma]: know?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure it'll sound quaint to a lot of young people listening to this because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what you describe of your presentations is really, basically you're making a physical
[Amit Varma]: PowerPoint. There's no computer, you're making a physical PowerPoint and taking it equally,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when, you know, you speak of editing your, you know, actually talking of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: taking the reels and, you know, getting your editor to splice them and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: you're not just sitting on a Mac book and, you know, moving frames allowed around. So,
[Amit Varma]: so my question is that, do you feel that this sort of process, and it's a, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: dual process, one is that you're doing everything, there's no specialization, so you have to
[Amit Varma]: get involved everywhere. And therefore you're enthusiastic about every part of the process
[Amit Varma]: and you understand it intimately. And secondly, your inner sense, working with your hands,
[Amit Varma]: you can't take lazy shortcuts because you've kind of got to do everything, you know? Today,
[Amit Varma]: if I make a PowerPoint, I can just put whatever I want, because I can edit it five minutes
[Amit Varma]: later. If you're making a physical chart, you have to do that thinking kind of beforehand.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that there is value in that that is lost in modern times? I mean, technology
[Amit Varma]: is great, obviously, I'm not being a Luddite and saying that that's an issue. But in modern
[Amit Varma]: times, we have one, we have specialization and two, we have these tools, not just technological
[Amit Varma]: tools, but also cognitive tools in terms of shortcuts that you take in the ways that you
[Amit Varma]: think about these things. And do you feel that that, you know, those three years, the
[Amit Varma]: sort of hands on training that you got actually throwing yourself into everything was invaluable
[Amit Varma]: and you know, played a big part in shaping you?
[Guest]: I think that stayed with me for a long, long time. You know, I mean, the fact that you
[Guest]: could actually roll up your sleeves, sit with the editor, edit the film, and got you prepared
[Guest]: to a lot of things. But, you know, I also think that sometimes we look at the past with
[Guest]: a lot of rose tinted glasses. I think today, what the great thing I did, so called, you
[Guest]: know, editing of the film. Today, a kid can do it with his mobile phone. So sometimes
[Guest]: we, the 60 plus lot think that, you know, you have to learn it the hard way. But today's
[Guest]: kids can, you know, can do the same editing. You know, what did I do? I took shots which
[Guest]: were 20 frame shots and I cut them into five frame shots, you know. I mean, the editor
[Guest]: was also surprised. He said, you want just five frames? I said, yeah, I want just five
[Guest]: frames. Cut five, five, five, five, five, five. In that 30 seconds, I want cut, cut,
[Guest]: cut, cut, cut, cut every five frames. Today, a kid does it with his mobile phone. So what's
[Guest]: the big deal? You know, today, I mean, very often we think, you know, they are not, but
[Guest]: they are so bloody smart and they can do things so well with technology that now they need
[Guest]: to figure out what to do with it next. You know, those days, you know, the reason I did
[Guest]: that editing was because the director I was working with was more of a feature film director.
[Guest]: He liked the long shot, you know, put a trolley and go slow shot. So he, you know, he was
[Guest]: shooting a, this is a 30 second film, which had so much drama and in his mind, he could
[Guest]: not comprehend, you could do a five second shot, you know, not even five seconds, five
[Guest]: frame shot. Right. So, and when I finally did it, he said, yeah, this looks, yeah, this
[Guest]: is, seems to have the drama, which you guys want. Because in his case, the drama is, is
[Guest]: a one second of pulling the punch of the one, you know, it's a, it's a slow shot. But the
[Guest]: fact is, you know, a lot of us of that era of advertising, and I think many of us went
[Guest]: on to become CEOs of different agencies. We all grew up like that. I mean, Ashok Kurian
[Guest]: set up Ambience and of course, Prasad, another friend of mine who set up Capital, Rajiv Agarwal
[Guest]: set up Enterprise and, and, you know, sorry, Nexus Equity did great work for Raymond. And
[Guest]: of course that era people, you know, people like Arvind Sharma went on to handle Labernet,
[Guest]: you know, so all these guys, we, we come from that era where we rolled up our sleeves and
[Guest]: we did a lot of things, you know, now it's different right now. Now this era is going
[Guest]: to throw up a different set of people are going to be probably understanding numbers
[Guest]: and algorithms and those kinds of things. So I think the whole thing is coming around
[Amit Varma]: again. Yeah. And that's a, that's a great point you make about accelerated learning
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, you know, what you had to painstakingly edit out could be done by
[Amit Varma]: a kid on his mobile phone. And I mean, I just look at chess, which I follow pretty closely.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting sort of insights about chess that is fairly commonplace now
[Amit Varma]: is that 80 of the top hundred players of all time are probably young active players today.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and one of the reasons is that it's your accelerated learning because so much
[Amit Varma]: of your learning comes from playing, you know, tens of thousands of games of Blitz on sites
[Amit Varma]: like chess.com and chess24 and so on. And therefore your pattern recognition becomes
[Amit Varma]: quicker that much faster. You have so many better study tools for theory. You have so
[Amit Varma]: much, you know, computer analysis as a pedagogical aid is so important. So you get that kind
[Amit Varma]: of accelerated learning, which is pretty incredible. My next question is also about that sort of
[Amit Varma]: period, like in one of your books, writing about that period, you've written quote, the
[Amit Varma]: Indian advertising scene was largely dominated by convent educated boys in the sixties and
[Amit Varma]: seventies. They took over the task from the British admin who exited the country in the
[Amit Varma]: fifties. Indian language writers were confined to the language department, a stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And as you've pointed out, you know, that was gradually beginning to change. Like Kamlesh
[Amit Varma]: Pandey who went on to write Tezab is, you know, an example of that sort of change coming.
[Amit Varma]: But my question here is that given that, you know, the people who worked with you, all
[Amit Varma]: your colleagues and the people who formed the agencies would be from mostly from the
[Amit Varma]: English speaking elites living a certain kind of life in the big cities. And yet the consumers
[Amit Varma]: that you're selling to, and this is, I guess, especially true as the nineties happen and
[Amit Varma]: liberalization happens. And, you know, there is the explosion of the Indian middle class
[Amit Varma]: in towns and cities all across India. So in a sense, the advertising community is drawn
[Amit Varma]: from the elites, but your market is a much larger market. And that brings about the difficult
[Amit Varma]: question of how do you sort of understand what this market is? And this is obviously
[Amit Varma]: a time before there is, you know, enough data and so on. So what was that process like of
[Amit Varma]: getting to terms with who you're selling to and learning to recognize your own biases
[Guest]: and kind of keeping them out of the way?
[Guest]: You know, yeah, I think, if you look at the fifties and sixties, the Britishers, Fieldin
[Guest]: and all these guys, you know, great guys, they all left and the people who succeeded
[Guest]: them were largely English speaking city living people, right? Gerson de Cunha. I'm not counting
[Guest]: Alec in that because Alec is somewhat different. Gerson de Cunha, Sylvie de Cunha, you know,
[Guest]: people like that. But around the mid seventies, people like Alec and all figured out that,
[Guest]: you know, clients are getting these IAM types as, you know, brand managers. So he said,
[Guest]: look, we need to match that with on our side. So he, you know, Lintas, one of the first
[Guest]: agencies to go and start hiring from the IAMs and then JWT followed, Rediffusion, all of
[Guest]: them followed. So what happened was in the sixties and say mid seventies, it was largely,
[Guest]: I would call the English theater type who were running agencies. You know, you need
[Guest]: people who had to do drama to present and, you know, and then the English, very English
[Guest]: theater personalities. Then mid seventies onwards, a new thing happened. The MBA started
[Guest]: coming in and MBAs realized that the consumer is different. Consumer is not you or me. And
[Guest]: they started bringing in the discipline of consumer research. And, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: you're working in agency, but your friend is working in Hindustan Lever or you're working
[Guest]: in Richardson Wicks or he's working in Nestle is working in, and you know that they go into
[Guest]: go on market visit, they go and do deep immersion with consumers. So in fact, both I think in
[Guest]: Rediffusion, one of the most memorable part of my so-called orientation was two weeks
[Guest]: or the three weeks I spent in Rajasthan. Right. I don't know whether I've written it in my,
[Guest]: one of my books. So, you know, they said, look for three weeks, you guys have to go.
[Guest]: So I was told you have to meet Jethanand, who's a sales rep of Seba Gaigi, you know,
[Guest]: they have toothpaste, Binaka toothpaste, Seba Gaigi toothpaste, you have to meet him. Monday
[Guest]: morning 9.30 at this Amit Verma distributors, Barmer. I was given that on Friday morning.
[Guest]: So first thing I said, boss, where is Barmer? So that's your problem. So I discovered Barmer
[Guest]: was near Jodhpur. So I had to figure out how to get to Jodhpur and then from Jodhpur go
[Guest]: to Barmer. So which was, you know, fly down, hopping flight up to Jodhpur and then from
[Guest]: Jodhpur take a night train to Barmer and get out at Barmer and then go to one of those
[Guest]: local chawl trees, have a bath, you know, and then go to that distributor with my bag
[Guest]: saying Mr. Jethanand, I've come from Bombay, I want to visit the market with you. So three
[Guest]: weeks I was with him, you know, staying in local lodges, going, you know, I covered that
[Guest]: whole belt, you know, Ajmer, Sawai Madhopur, I may even have the notes somewhere. In every
[Guest]: single market, I covered some 10 different markets. So that kind of got imprinted into
[Guest]: you, you know, that is the real India. You know, what we see in Mumbai or Delhi is not
[Guest]: the real India. Though I feel in every big city, there are many, many little Indias,
[Guest]: you know, almost like a village type India in many cities. So I spent two, three weeks
[Guest]: in, shall I say, small town India and that was very impressionable. I think a lot of
[Guest]: agencies did that, you know, they took these MBAs, they sent them into the market saying,
[Guest]: look, you go and spend, you know, one month working the market. And so from the 70s, let's
[Guest]: say mid 70s to around the, say, the late 80s, the MBAs formed a defining culture in advertising.
[Guest]: They brought professionalism, they brought the orientation towards consumer research.
[Guest]: So it moved away from the theatrewala on to a more all India messaging. And at that time
[Guest]: television was coming up, you know, Doordarshan was coming up. Doordarshan's reach was dramatically
[Guest]: different from the reach of, let's say, cinema theatres, you know. So we had to do research
[Guest]: to understand consumers. So that changed. And then of course, Kamlesh Pandey was one
[Guest]: of the early pioneers who actually, I used to say, used to think in Hindi and write in
[Guest]: English. So in fact, his Hindi writing is always better than his English writing. But
[Guest]: Kamlesh was the early pioneer. And then later, of course, Piyush came and the whole generation
[Guest]: of writers came, including people like, you know, Nitish Tiwari and all these people came
[Guest]: and then the whole thing changed. But it was, I think, the English theatre type to the MBA
[Guest]: type. And then now to multiple types of people from all over India. You know, the MBA types
[Guest]: are largely, like you said, from big cities, Bombay, Delhi, Calcutta, Madras, kind of people.
[Guest]: But now I think the leadership is scattered. People are coming from, I don't think leadership
[Guest]: is not just confined to the top four or five or six cities today. You get leadership from
[Guest]: everywhere. Like, you know, even copywriters, art directors come from everywhere, right?
[Guest]: I mean, Nitish Tiwari has come from Indore and, you know, people are coming from everywhere,
[Guest]: which I think is great.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, a couple of the sort of case studies that you spoke out which stood out
[Amit Varma]: for me of illustrating sort of the danger of, you know, falling for preconceived notions
[Amit Varma]: of what audiences are like, was, you know, the story you told about Pradeep Guha at Zee,
[Amit Varma]: his chaiwala test, so to say, and also the sort of the Santur commercials. So tell us
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about that, because I found these very revealing about how sometimes you can,
[Amit Varma]: you know, have these preconceived notions of what people actually want. And then you
[Amit Varma]: realize through doing stuff that, hey, that it's actually very different.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I mean, we can make two mistakes. And I think the Pradeep Guha, Zee is one kind
[Guest]: of mistake, where the team at Zee felt that, you know, our consumer is maasi, they had
[Guest]: the term maasi, whereas this stuff, which you're presenting is very classy. So this
[Guest]: kind of stuff, my consumer will not understand, will not appreciate. And therefore, let us
[Guest]: maasify it. Let's make, let's dump it down, dump it down, dump it down. So we had really
[Guest]: dumped down the advertising to a very low, mundane level. And when I went to meet Pradeep,
[Guest]: Pradeep was then the CEO, and I went to meet Pradeep, Pradeep said, yeah, you're doing
[Guest]: good work, but tumhara yeh yaar bahut maja nahi aaya, tumhara art direction teek nahi
[Guest]: hai, something. I said, yaar tu kya dekh, kya dekh, kya art direction bol raha hai.
[Guest]: So he said, no, I just saw, you know, last week that hoarding, which I saw, looks very,
[Guest]: you know, very average, you know. And Pradeep was actually very enterprising. So he said,
[Guest]: you know, actually, you want some art director on a freelance basis, yaar, I will, I will
[Guest]: send you some guy, very good. So he let him hire a man. I said, Pradeep, you saw what
[Guest]: has been put up on the hoarding, right? Have you seen the options which are presented before
[Guest]: what was put up? So he said, what do you mean? So I said, yeah, we presented six rounds.
[Guest]: And then this, what went up was the sixth round. So I said, do you want to see the stuff?
[Guest]: He said, yeah, yeah, show me. And I actually carried the stuff. So I said, this is first
[Guest]: round, this is second round, this is third round, this is fourth round, this is fifth
[Guest]: round, this is sixth round which you saw. So he said, you showed all this? I said, yeah.
[Guest]: And they picked the sixth one. I said, yeah. What would you guys recommend? I said, I recommend
[Guest]: the first one. I think first one is fine. Very nice looking graphics and, but your team
[Guest]: rejected it. So why did they reject it? They said, no, they said, you know, this is too
[Guest]: sophisticated for our target audience. They will not understand it. You know, people,
[Guest]: you know, Jodhpur and Indore and all, they will not understand it. So he said, oh, okay.
[Guest]: Then he called the head of Marcom and he asked her the same question. So she said the same
[Guest]: thing. Yeah, they presented all this, but we preferred the sixth option because that
[Guest]: is nice and massy. Whereas the first two, three options are very classy. And I've been
[Guest]: trying to tell Ambi, you know, our audience are different. You guys don't seem to understand.
[Guest]: So I said, okay. So by then, the chaiwala walked in and Pradeep said, you guys keep
[Guest]: quiet. He asked, you know, Raju, which one do you like? Raju was a chaiwala from a small
[Guest]: town, probably living in Bombay for the last two, three years. So he picked the first one.
[Guest]: He said, I like this one. So he said, okay, bring tea for everyone. And he sent them all.
[Guest]: Then he said, yeah, look, yeah, guys, you know, you're still looking at India through
[Guest]: your, you know, wrong lenses. The India is changing. The small town consumer is becoming
[Guest]: more and more sophisticated. Please, for heaven's sake, don't massify everything, you know.
[Guest]: And then later, of course, they decided to do things which are slightly different. But
[Guest]: a lot of time, we tend to make that mistake that our consumer is... You can make two mistakes.
[Guest]: One is to think that our consumer is just like us, which is wrong, right? In India,
[Guest]: our consumer is not like us. But the other extreme is a consumer is really one dehati
[Guest]: who will not understand anything, has very poor taste. Both are mistakes. You know, both
[Amit Varma]: are mistakes. You need to find the right path in between. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the Santur commercial you've spoken of was also sort of a great example of that and
[Amit Varma]: almost pathbreaking work. Tell me a bit about how that panned out as well. And that's also,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, mentioned in Spring, your new book as an example of how to deal with rejection.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a lesson in, you know, that aspect as well.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, so I've narrated that, you know, that story is from Spring, not from
[Guest]: Sponge. You know, when I moved from Chennai, I was in Chennai running the south operations
[Guest]: of Ulka and I had resolved that I will not move to Bombay till I turn it around. So it
[Guest]: took me about three years to turn it around and start making some profits. And the fifth
[Guest]: year was a good year. And that was the year I was told, OK, now you move. Enough is enough.
[Guest]: Sitting and, you know, having your, you know, madrasi, rasam and sambar, you bloody come
[Guest]: to Bombay. So I moved back to Bombay. And I was told there is this important account
[Guest]: called Santur and you're supposed to handle it. And when I started, you know, getting
[Guest]: into the account, I realized that the brand had come to the agency in 1989. The agency
[Guest]: had done very good work based on this consumer insight that every woman wants to look young,
[Guest]: younger looking, same promise. And the agency had done three ads which had worked. After
[Guest]: that, the ad had stopped working. So actually, I didn't know, later I discovered, you know,
[Guest]: I was actually inheriting a very hot potato because the client was actually quite unhappy
[Guest]: with what the agency had done. And the agency was convinced that they were on the right
[Guest]: track and they had a new script ready, which they wanted the client to buy. The client
[Guest]: refused to buy that ad, put it through research and said that it's not working. And this debate
[Guest]: was going on for about six months when I got plonked in the middle of this debate. And
[Guest]: those were, you know, I mean, it were different days, really. You know, agencies used to take
[Guest]: tough stance saying, no, we believe in this. And the clients used to encourage that. You
[Guest]: know, nowadays a brand manager will say, I'm sacking the agency, I'm calling for a pitch.
[Guest]: Those days the client said, no, no, no. If you guys believe in that, keep fighting. We'll
[Guest]: find a way out. So the agency and the client were engaged in a pretty tough disagreement
[Guest]: and I was put in the middle. And I was told by the client later that, you know, we were
[Guest]: told this guy's coming from Chennai, he'll come with a fresh perspective. And he's a
[Guest]: bright guy, great experience, and he'll give fresh perspective. So when I got into it and
[Guest]: I discovered the agency had presented a film about a woman in an aerobics class being mistaken
[Guest]: for a college student. And the little kid comes and says, you know, mommy. And the agency
[Guest]: had called, you know, agencies have this habit of calling these ad films like feature films.
[Guest]: So this film was called Jazz. And the client was really upset. You know, what do you mean
[Guest]: jazz? Who understands jazz? My consumer is in small town Andhra, small town Karnataka.
[Guest]: What are you talking about jazz? You guys are all Bombay type, Colaba type. You go to
[Guest]: small town India, understand India. You don't understand India, blah, blah, blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah. So I had to, you know, kind of unpeel this onion. And I discovered that a client
[Guest]: felt that, yeah, maybe the younger looking skin is a good idea. Maybe we should continue,
[Guest]: but this is not going to work. This jazz and all won't work. So I said, look, I'm stopping
[Guest]: to call it jazz. Yeah, we'll call it aerobics. Aerobics class. Okay. Aerobics class happens
[Guest]: in all cities. So we'll call it aerobics. So we called it aerobics. So then I said,
[Guest]: you know, I will do this reframing. You know, I talked about that. So I said, look, that
[Guest]: is one. Let me, let me give you another option. So we wrote a script about a girl entering
[Guest]: a music store and buying a flute. And someone comes and asks, you know, which college are
[Guest]: you in? And then she says, no, I'm not to call. And then the little kid comes and says,
[Guest]: mommy. So we presented both the scripts finally. So what we did instead of saying, buy this,
[Guest]: buy this, buy this. So I said, look, we'll give you two. You can buy either of the two.
[Guest]: We are okay. But our, our strong recommendation is let's invest the money, make both the ads.
[Guest]: Okay. Maybe the flute film you run in Andhra, the aerobics film you can run in DD Metro
[Guest]: or whatever, the more, slightly more premium channel. So the client for whatever it is
[Guest]: worth was at a bit send. Yeah. Brand sale was going down for nine months. He said, okay,
[Guest]: we'll make both the ads. So they made both the ads. Right. And then they took these both
[Guest]: ads and they were very professional, right? It's not as if they're wanting to bury the
[Guest]: ad. They said, no, we will take both the ads and we will do research in small town, India.
[Guest]: And when they did the research in small town, India, they discovered that the small town
[Guest]: woman actually liked the aerobics more than the music store story film. So, and then later
[Guest]: we said, look, she's liking the aerobics because that is aspirational for her. She'll never
[Guest]: go and do that, you know, dance class or whatever. She'll not do that, but she loves to do that.
[Guest]: She'd love to do that. And as a result, that film became a breakthrough film for the brand,
[Guest]: you know, and, and mind you, it took the agency nine months to convince the client to do that
[Guest]: film. And finally I managed to do it because I reframed the problem. I created a wider
[Guest]: canvas and then therefore the client could step down, the agency could step down. And
[Guest]: at that time in 94, the client was even thinking of abandoning this yellow, you know, this
[Guest]: younger looking skin, mistaken identity story. They said it's not working because you know
[Guest]: what happened to the agency was stuck and they were doing shadi after shadi after shadi
[Guest]: and it stopped working. And the aerobics was a breakthrough film. And then from aerobics,
[Guest]: we did dress designer, we did a whole lot of other things. And today, you know, the
[Guest]: agency has changed, but the client is continuing with the same theme. And Santur has become
[Guest]: the second largest soap brand in India, overtaking Hindustan Leber's Lux, which is my little
[Guest]: revenge to Hindustan Leber for not giving me that summer assignment, right.
[Amit Varma]: So they rejected you twice and you dethroned their big soap. So yeah, it's, it's, it's
[Amit Varma]: almost a soap opera. It's a real soap opera. So I want to, you know, before we touch upon
[Amit Varma]: the big themes of your books and I want to talk about all of them, you know, advertising
[Amit Varma]: as a whole, you know, the lessons of sponge, you know, leadership and knowledge management
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And also of course, the lessons of spring, how to bounce back from rejection.
[Amit Varma]: But before we want to do that, I also want to continue talking about your personal journey,
[Amit Varma]: because a couple of things stand out for me. And, and one is that, and this is something
[Amit Varma]: that you've described in great detail in sponge, for example, your previous book, one is that
[Amit Varma]: you're always eager to learn things, even after you've become a senior advertising person,
[Amit Varma]: and you become the CEO and all of that, you're not a know it all, you're still talking to
[Amit Varma]: people asking questions, trying to learn things. And at the same time, you are also beginning
[Amit Varma]: to teach, like in the 90s, you spoke about how, you know, you started teaching at KJ
[Amit Varma]: Somaya and then various other places. And because there were no brand studies, because
[Amit Varma]: there were no case studies away, you know, Harvard and all, would you put together your
[Amit Varma]: own and that became the first of your 10 books and so on and so forth, down the line, tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about this. And would I be correct in surmising that these two in a sense, are
[Amit Varma]: related, in the sense that I would imagine that the necessity of teaching something forces
[Amit Varma]: you to learn, and that these two impulses are, they almost go together in a sense, would
[Amit Varma]: that be correct?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, perfect. I think, Amit, I think it's absolutely perfect. If you want to be
[Guest]: a good teacher, you have to be a good learner. Like, you know, if you want to write an article
[Guest]: of 1000 words, you should at least read 10,000 words of what other people have written on
[Guest]: the subject. And you know that, you do that so diligently. So, I, in fact, tried teaching
[Guest]: in my early days, you know, as an account executive, working with my ESD motorcycle.
[Guest]: I had a job in Worli. And a friend of mine recommended that Bhavans had this evening
[Guest]: program and they wanted someone to teach advertising to them. So, I used to drive down from Worli
[Guest]: to Andheri to take a class for my evening thing, but I found it too difficult. You know,
[Guest]: I mean, I had a, advertising job is very strenuous and I could not, so it used to be bad. I mean,
[Guest]: I had a lovely bunch of working professionals who used to come to my class, very nice people.
[Guest]: And I think twice I missed the class. And they waited for me and went away and I felt
[Guest]: really bad. And I, and I said, I'll complete the course, but I will not do this again.
[Guest]: So I stopped. And then when I came back to Mumbai in 94, a friend of mine told me to
[Guest]: go and meet Professor Pyarelal Arya, who was then the director of Somaya. And I've been
[Guest]: shaped a lot by what he told me. So, I went and I met him and he said, he always called
[Guest]: sir, sir, sir. So, again, he said, I am Ahmedabad graduate. So, he said, sir, you have to come
[Guest]: and teach. So, I said, you know, Dr. Arya, I don't have time. He said, no, I will figure
[Guest]: out. You tell me what time can you give me? So I said, okay. Saturday or Sunday, Sunday
[Guest]: 2 to 5. He said, okay, done. Sunday 2 to 5, you come and teach. So I started. That's how
[Guest]: I started. Actually, you know, he said, come and teach the course. Which course? He said,
[Guest]: you teach advertising sales management. Okay. Advertising and sales promotion. That's how
[Guest]: I started. 95, I think I started advertising and sales promotion. And I used to go, I think
[Guest]: it was about 10 or 14 Sundays, 2 o'clock you drive down to Somaya campus and a lovely bunch
[Guest]: of students and some of them actually ended up joining my agency. In fact, one of my students
[Guest]: is a senior, is a president of the Bombay office now. And then I started teaching them
[Guest]: and I used to take articles from, you know, business world used to come out of those articles.
[Guest]: I used to, you know, those days, I'm talking 95, 96, Harvard cases are very expensive.
[Guest]: You know, the copyright was difficult. And some of Dr. Arya said, no, no photocopy. Legitimate
[Guest]: denge. So we never photocopied, you know, the Harvard cases. So I used those business
[Guest]: world cases. And then I said, why don't I write some cases of my own to use? So I then
[Guest]: wrote a few cases based on my own experience with, say, Santur and Sundrop and Tropicana
[Guest]: and, you know, some of those brands. And I even wrote cases on some of my brands I worked
[Guest]: on when I was running the South operation. Like there's an article, there's a case on
[Guest]: Fenner, Fenner fan belt, you know, Bangaram Island Resort, which is a very interesting
[Guest]: little case, Cochin Export Processing Zone. So I put all these together and I used them
[Guest]: for teaching. And that's how the writing journey started once again. And one of my professor
[Guest]: friends in America, I shared these cases with him. He said, yeah, why don't you publish
[Guest]: it as a book? I said, what? He said, yeah, I mean, put together 10, 12 cases, put some
[Guest]: theory stuff and publish it. So I said, okay. So he said, look, let me share it with a friend
[Guest]: of mine who was a big, big time professor. So he sent it to that friend. And that friend
[Guest]: said, look, these cases look more like promotional puff pieces for the agency. And I don't know
[Guest]: who will publish this as a book. So my friend was a little disappointed. He said, I'm sorry,
[Guest]: you know, this guy says this is not publishable as a book. I said, that's okay. I mean, that's
[Guest]: his point of view sitting in Chicago, but I'm in Mumbai. And so I sent five of those
[Guest]: cases to Tata McGraw Hill. And within a week, someone from Tata McGraw Hill, Deepa came,
[Guest]: met me. She said, we are keen. When can you give me the other cases? So I said, yeah,
[Guest]: give me about three months. I put it together and I gave it to her. That's how the book
[Guest]: came out. It came out in I think year 2000 was when the first book came out. Just a bunch
[Guest]: of cases with some little bit of theory. And I used all of them. I used all of them in
[Guest]: teaching and I know a lot of business schools continue to use them. Though it's out of print
[Guest]: now, sometimes I get a call saying, where can I get it? I have a PDF version. I give
[Guest]: it to them saying, go ahead and use it. So that was then. You could not get the Harvard
[Guest]: cases. You could not get the Ivy cases. It was so impossible to get. So we had to create
[Guest]: our own, what you call, jugaad innovation to do this.
[Guest]: There were a few good advertising in a brand management case study. There was an advertising
[Guest]: case study. The first book was written by Shubhrato Sen Gupta. I still have a copy of
[Guest]: the book. And in some sense, he is my role model because he was a CEO of a large agency
[Guest]: called Clarion Advertising. He took time out to write a book of cases. And he used to go
[Guest]: and teach at IIM Ahmedabad and he used to come and teach us in IIM Calcutta. And a lot
[Guest]: of my friends who took marketing specialization in IIM Calcutta do believe that was the best
[Guest]: marketing course they attended on campus.
[Guest]: But between, that was 1979, but from 1979 to almost 1995-96, there were no real Indian
[Guest]: case study books which had come out. Labdi Bhandari wrote a very nice book, which I still
[Guest]: have and very good cases, which I used. But there was almost like a vacuum from something
[Guest]: like 76-77 till around 96-97. And of course, 96-97 onwards, a lot of people have started
[Guest]: writing books on Indian brands and Indian cases, which I think is very good today.
[Guest]: If you go and search on the Harvard Publishing, there are a lot of Indian cases there. There
[Guest]: are cases on Wipro, cases on TCS, Infosys, Mahindra, Royal Enfield. So many good Indian
[Guest]: cases are available today. Over the years, Harvard has also reduced the pricing. So it's
[Guest]: become much, much cheaper to get legitimate case studies to use in class.
[Guest]: So the utility of my case books, I wrote two of them, one alone and one with a colleague
[Guest]: called Kinjal Medh. My utility of those books are probably not as relevant today as they
[Guest]: were in the year 2000 to 2010-11-12.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that the process of teaching where you're basically, you know, taking a
[Amit Varma]: body of knowledge and you're presenting it in a systematic way to your students and therefore
[Amit Varma]: you're having to not just present a frame for them through which they can look at whatever
[Amit Varma]: you're teaching, but you're also in a sense building a frame for yourself. Does it then
[Amit Varma]: sort of clarify your thinking and make your thinking clearer as well?
[Amit Varma]: Like I would imagine that, you know, sometimes when I'm deep in a subject and there is that
[Amit Varma]: moment where suddenly everything makes sense and there is that, so to say, that thrill
[Amit Varma]: of understanding, that you're seeing things clearer because you're being sort of forced
[Amit Varma]: to delve into it that much more deeply. Was that there for you as a teacher as well? Like
[Amit Varma]: do you think your teaching side gig made you better at your advertising gig in some way?
[Guest]: Absolutely, Amit. You hit the nail on the head. I think my teaching gig made me a better
[Guest]: advertising professional. And I have spoken in the book Spring, I've spoken about how
[Guest]: we got the Tata Motors account, right? You know, again with Dr. Professor Arya, he said,
[Guest]: you know, sir, we should do something together. I said, what? You know, think of some idea
[Guest]: of some competition or something we can do together. I'm talking of 95, 96. So he said,
[Guest]: why don't we do a case study competition? I said, huh, we can do. So I said, we'll create
[Guest]: a special brand, which will be an advertising case study competition. And we called it Comstrat.
[Guest]: It still exists. And I said, look, we will do it across all campuses. So what we'll try
[Guest]: and do is get a client to contribute a case. With this case, we will use as a competition
[Guest]: to select and we'll give the prize. So Professor Arya said, we will design the trophy and we
[Guest]: will give some money as support. So we'll call it the FCB Ulka KJ Somaya Comstrat case
[Guest]: study competition. I'm talking of, you know, this was 95, 96, 97. You know, there were
[Guest]: very, very few of these happening then. And luck would have it, when we were chasing a
[Guest]: big auto account and when Tata Telco at that time had unveiled their new car at the auto
[Guest]: show in 98 January, I said, look, we will get Tata to participate in this. So we went
[Guest]: and met them. At that time, they're not even called for an agency pitch. We met them. We
[Guest]: said, we want you to participate. They said, no, no, we can't reveal any information. We
[Guest]: said, don't reveal anything. We will write it from public domain information. You please
[Guest]: come for the judging. So they came for the judging. I think there were five campuses
[Guest]: which were selected. I think NMIMS, KJ Somaya, I think IIT. I think one or two outstation
[Guest]: came for the final presentation and he was there. I think we had the presentation in
[Guest]: one of the auditoriums in Marine Line. And it was a great presentation. He loved it.
[Guest]: And maybe it gave him a bit of a positive vibe towards the agency. And later when we
[Guest]: pitched for the business, we got the business. But, but, you know, we, we started leveraging
[Guest]: all this. Teach, write cases. I remember giving my first case study book to a lot of my clients
[Guest]: and some of them said, look, when you're writing your next case study book, we should be there
[Guest]: in the book. I said, yeah, you know, you will be there in the book. And they were there
[Guest]: in the book. So, you know, it kind of helped us in, in many different ways. And of course,
[Guest]: you know, the fact that you teach, you read more, you pick up more. I used to pick up
[Guest]: articles and give it to my colleagues to read. We had a very, very vibrant account planning
[Guest]: team. The account planning team was again, encouraged to read and write and do research.
[Guest]: So it kind of became a nice, kind of a upward spinning, positive cycle of what the agency
[Guest]: can do and will do. So you became almost like a, you became more knowledgeable about what
[Guest]: was happening. You were reading more, you were understanding more, and that helped us
[Amit Varma]: to become a better agency. Tell me also about, you know, another fascinating part of your
[Amit Varma]: personal journey, which is when a few years ago you decided to do a PhD. So what was sort
[Amit Varma]: of the impetus behind that? And, you know, and that also of course became a book later
[Amit Varma]: on. So, you know, what drove you to do the PhD? Why a PhD? Yeah, you know, I mean, I
[Guest]: was teaching, right? I was teaching at KJ Somaya, and then later I was teaching at Erum IMS.
[Guest]: So it was Dr, it was Professor Arya who put that idea into my head in the year, I think
[Guest]: 99 or 2000, saying, Sir, aapko toh PhD karna padega. So I said, you know, Professor Arya,
[Guest]: main kidar time nahi hai sab. He said, no, no, Pune University is offering a flexible
[Guest]: PhD. You can go to Pune, spend, I'll arrange for it, you go and do, attend some classes,
[Guest]: which you have to in one week, and then you can come back to Bombay, do the PhD. I said,
[Guest]: no, uske liye time nahi hai, you know, I don't think I can do it. So I dropped it. A year
[Guest]: or two later, Professor Suresh Ghai was then the director at Somaya. He called me one day
[Guest]: saying, Sir, are you free to come to campus tomorrow? So I said, haan, kal aaja thaon,
[Guest]: so I went there and we sat down. He said, look, Bombay University is now offering flexible
[Guest]: PhD option. You've been registered. I want you to do PhD with us. I said, Sir, mere paas
[Guest]: kidar hai time? He said, nahi, nahi, jyada load nahi hai. You have to come here once
[Guest]: every two weeks for a half a day class, and I will find you a guide. I know you're academically
[Guest]: minded. I know you'll do it seriously. So I want you to do it. So I got literally, you
[Guest]: know, kind of arm twisted into doing it. And then when I got into it, I found it very enjoyable.
[Guest]: I mean, we had a group of about 15 of us who were in that batch. And I, you know, one was
[Guest]: a very senior executive at Wachat Hospital. One was a guy from a nutrition company. The
[Guest]: third was Hariharan from Jet Airways. There was Isaac Jacob, who was a professor. So we
[Guest]: had a nice group of people. Baghi, who is a professor at IIM Indore, I think. So we
[Guest]: had a nice, we used to meet every two weeks. And we learned a lot and we learned the fun
[Guest]: of doing research. And of course, dealing with Mumbai University is a different game.
[Guest]: But we learned that also, you know, how to get the various permissions, approvals. So
[Guest]: I did my PhD, I published, you know, I got my PhD. And I, and I said, Look, I want to
[Guest]: publish this PhD thesis as a book, you know, and then, and that didn't turn out that way.
[Guest]: But it turned out into a different kind of a book. Yeah, so that's the other story.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, well, let's let's take a quick commercial break now. And we'll come back and continue
[Amit Varma]: the rest of this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Cool.
[Unknown]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want
[Unknown]: to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition for you.
[Unknown]: Head on over to Indian colors.com. Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some
[Unknown]: of the best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use
[Unknown]: like tote bags, pouches and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest
[Unknown]: modern Indian art at affordable prices. And artists get royalties for every product you
[Unknown]: buy win win game. The Indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses
[Unknown]: for women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmay Samanta,
[Unknown]: Manisha Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay home, but
[Unknown]: dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can
[Unknown]: show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors. Corporate
[Amit Varma]: gifting is also available. So head on over to Indian colors.com. There's colors with
[Unknown]: an OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right. Unseen for 15% off at Indian colors.com. Welcome back to the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen. I'm chatting with Ambi Parmeswaran about his fascinating career and the fascinating
[Amit Varma]: books that he's written, including the latest book, spring bouncing back from rejection.
[Amit Varma]: You know, among your books, one that I found particularly fascinating was Nawab's Nudes
[Amit Varma]: Noodles because, you know, I spent a few months rather myself in advertising back in 94 before
[Amit Varma]: moving on to television and doing a bunch of other things. And I found it really insightful.
[Amit Varma]: I'd also done an episode more than a year ago with Santosh Desai, who had some, you
[Amit Varma]: know, stunning insights about Indian society, part of which came from his time in Indian
[Amit Varma]: advertising. Because if you're figuring out the consumer, you are also figuring out the
[Amit Varma]: individual, the citizen, all these broad social currents, and so on. And a lot of your journey
[Amit Varma]: seems similar in terms of sort of understanding what India is all about, and so on. So I want
[Amit Varma]: to ask you a sort of a few broad questions about advertising and you know, what you've
[Amit Varma]: seen over the last three, four decades. And my first sort of question is, how much of
[Amit Varma]: a reflection of popular culture or how much of a reflection of our society rather is advertising
[Amit Varma]: and how much can it actually play a part in shaping it? For example, you've quoted in
[Amit Varma]: one of your talks, Marshall McLuhan, where he says, quote, historians and archaeologists
[Amit Varma]: will one day discover that the ads of our time are the richest and most faithful reflections
[Amit Varma]: that any society ever made of this entire range of activities, stop quote. And you also
[Amit Varma]: quoted Kurt Vonnegut is saying, what passes as culture in my head is really a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: commercials, stop quote. And you know, for me, when I sort of look back at, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all of the advertising that I've been sort of exposed to over the years, and while reading
[Amit Varma]: your books, you mentioned so many commercials, and I am the kind of person that if you mention
[Amit Varma]: a commercial, I will immediately go to YouTube and look for it and watch it. So it was almost
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, reading your books took me on this sort of this trip through my memories,
[Amit Varma]: through this changing India, where, you know, we take the present time and what it is for
[Amit Varma]: granted and every all changes immediately normalized. But, you know, looking at commercials
[Amit Varma]: of the 80s and the 90s, and all of that was quite a fascinating trip in that sense. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what's what's your sense of how advertising has kind of coped with the great
[Amit Varma]: social change in India in the last 20 plus years, for example?
[Guest]: You know, so let me pull back a bit, you know, we're talking about my PhD and how, you know,
[Guest]: as a part of my PhD, I started understanding religion and how religion is involved in shaping
[Guest]: our behavior. And I ended up writing a book called For God's Sake, which got published
[Guest]: by Penguin. And the guy who was my publisher at Penguin, Anish Chandy, went out on his
[Guest]: own and he said, I want to be a literary agent. So I said, yeah, but I said, I don't have
[Guest]: nothing else to write. He said, no, no, no, I'm coming to Bombay. Let's have a coffee
[Guest]: and let's chat about it. So we were sitting in my office and he said, Ambi, you should
[Guest]: write the most definitive book on Indian advertising. I said, what do you mean? Yeah, something
[Guest]: like, you know, one or two books he gave. I said, look, I don't have that kind of time
[Guest]: and I don't know enough to write that. He said, okay, what can you write? I said, look,
[Guest]: I can write about how advertising has changed over the last so many years and how it has
[Guest]: reflected societal change. So he said, okay, start writing 50, 60. I said, no. I said,
[Guest]: I don't think that'll work, but let me think about how to write it. So then we disagreed.
[Guest]: I said, look, I want to look at advertising as showing children, showing women, showing
[Guest]: men, showing food. I want to show it like that. He said, no, I don't think it'll work.
[Guest]: You should look at it more like a historical piece. So I said, no, no, no, I'm not a historian.
[Guest]: So then when I started writing, I wrote three chapters and then he then warmed up and then
[Guest]: we found a publisher, Penguin, who added a great amount of value. So that's when I, you
[Guest]: know, I started my career in advertising in 1979. Okay. Maybe I was following advertising
[Guest]: from 1977 onwards. So I had to go back and look at the advertising of 1960s, 70s, 80s,
[Guest]: 90s. And then of course, 2000, when I was writing the book and I started putting them
[Guest]: in silos, you know, ad which show men, ad which show children, ad which are about marriage,
[Guest]: ad which are about, you know, food, transportation. And then, and then I realized that while people
[Guest]: have written books about how television programming has reflected changing society, Rachel Dyer
[Guest]: has written some fascinating books on how Hindi movies have reflected the changing society,
[Guest]: the entire Andy, Angry Young Man, the NRI phase. I realized no one has looked at advertising
[Guest]: and how advertising has reflected the change in Indian society. So that became the anchor.
[Guest]: And I said, I will look at it, you know, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, how marriage is being shown,
[Guest]: how sports is being shown, how, you know, how men are being shown, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: That's how, that's how I started putting things together. And I said, look, see, the good
[Guest]: thing about writing this book at that time was that I was almost out of advertising,
[Guest]: right? I was in my last phase of Ulka and I knew I was going to get out in 2016 and
[Guest]: the book was going to be published in 2016. So I could write very openly about all other
[Guest]: ads, you know, so till then I was a little bit more constrained, you know, I cannot praise
[Guest]: other agencies ad that liberally. I have to be a little constrained, but I said, look,
[Guest]: now I'm going to open up and I'm going to write what I think about great ads, you know,
[Guest]: and, and I said in this book, I will not only write about Ulka and FCB Ulka, I will write
[Guest]: about all ads. So maybe there are some 300 ads mentioned in the book, maybe 10 of them
[Guest]: are from Ulka, you know, the rest are entirely outside the domain. And I, and that I think
[Guest]: worked. And I think as a, as a mark of respect for the industry, when I asked my leading
[Guest]: competitors for an endorsement, right? Piyush, Balki, Prasoon Joshi, everyone, you know,
[Guest]: didn't need a second reminder, you know, boom, the endorsement came and that was good. And
[Guest]: maybe that's also because I was moving out, right? So there was no question of my going
[Guest]: to use this as a promotion piece for the agency. So, and I, when I started looking at advertising
[Guest]: and I started reading, you know, like I said, when you start writing, you got to read and
[Guest]: you start reading a lot of stuff. Like I went back to Marshall McLuhan and I spoke to this
[Guest]: friend of mine, I think I've quoted him in some places, Arvind Rajagopal, who is a professor
[Guest]: of media studies at NYU. He pointed me towards six, seven books to read. One of them was
[Guest]: a book called Gender Advertisements, written by a professor called Irving Goffman at University
[Guest]: of California, right? And this book was not available anywhere. And then therefore I had
[Guest]: to get my son to buy it on second hand in Amazon in the US and send it to me and I went
[Guest]: through it because I realized that was a useful book to read and to have. So one had to do
[Guest]: a lot of this kind of research, you know. There are, you know, the books on Indian advertising,
[Guest]: so-called somewhat historical books are not very great. You know, I'm sorry. There are
[Guest]: a couple of ones which have been written, but you know, nothing is in the league of
[Guest]: say gender advertisements or one or two other books I read in America. The American books
[Guest]: are very negative to advertising. You know, a lot of books which are about American advertising
[Guest]: take the Kurt Vonnegut route, which is, you know, American advertising destroyed our culture,
[Guest]: you know. So Fables of Abundance, a lot of those books I read, I read a whole series
[Guest]: of them. And then I said, my voice will be somewhat different. And I had to develop a
[Guest]: particular voice, which is more happy, a more positive, a more, shall we say, inclusive
[Guest]: voice of what advertising is. And I think, I think unlike in America, in India, I don't
[Guest]: know, maybe because we are all now Nautanki artists, our advertising is a lot more enjoyable.
[Guest]: Even my friends, Indians who are settled abroad, they keep telling me, you know, when we see
[Guest]: those ads on Sun TV and all, much better than the ads we see on American TV. But I don't
[Guest]: know why, maybe because we are better storytellers or whatever. So I had a great time. So the
[Guest]: big question, Amit, is, does advertising reflect society? Can it change society? Now, I think,
[Guest]: I think the argument is that advertising invariably reflects society. So I remember when I was
[Guest]: doing this talk at Godrej Culture Lab, Santosh Desai was my fellow panelist. And a dear friend
[Guest]: of mine, KBS Anand of Asian Paints stood up and asked me this question, saying, Ambi,
[Guest]: you're saying that these copywriters are great observers of societal change. I don't think
[Guest]: so, yaar. I don't think they understand societal change. They're writing stuff which they think
[Guest]: is fun. And in fact, Santosh also said, look, Ambi, I think you're giving too much credit
[Guest]: to the advertising industry for spotting societal change. I said, no, let me think about it.
[Guest]: And then I wrote a piece in Economic Times saying, look, I don't think advertising copywriters
[Guest]: are actively looking at social change, but they are part of society and they're observing
[Guest]: the change, right? That goes into their system that comes out as ads, right? So, willy nilly,
[Guest]: whether you like it or not, if you're a copywriter, you're watching TV serials, you're watching
[Guest]: movies, you're watching what is happening around you, that goes into you, that becomes
[Guest]: an ad, right? So, whether you like it or not, you are in society, you're a part of the change
[Guest]: and therefore you're reflecting that change in society, in your advertising, consciously.
[Guest]: And when you pull back and say, okay, actually see how marriage has been depicted or how
[Guest]: old age has been depicted, right? The other question, can advertising change society?
[Guest]: I don't know. I don't think advertising has that much power to, for example, reduce color
[Guest]: bias or to reduce caste bias or religious bias. We can nudge it, we can nudge it a bit
[Guest]: and I call that neo-visualization. Irving Goffman says that whole advertising industry
[Guest]: is about hyper-ritualization. So, all the rituals are hyper, you know, so men are bigger,
[Guest]: women are smaller, etc. And I'm saying advertising can do neo-visualization. You can think of
[Guest]: a new role for the kid, you can think of a new role for the husband or the wife, right?
[Guest]: But can you change deeply held societal beliefs? I don't think so. I don't think advertising
[Guest]: can do that. That is a job of social worker, that is a job of religion, that's a job of,
[Guest]: you know, larger popular culture. I don't think an advertising campaign can remove color
[Guest]: bias or can remove, we can do a little bit. I mean, I think some of the stuff which brands
[Guest]: are trying to do is helping it, but I don't think we can do too much. Maybe I'm underestimating
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: So, if you'll indulge me, I'll think aloud a bit. Like one, of course, I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: that it's a reflection of society, but it strikes me that it is of necessity and unavoidably
[Amit Varma]: a simplistic reflection. Let me explain what I mean by that. I think whenever you're trying
[Amit Varma]: to understand something that is very complex, you do it by figuring out certain heuristics
[Amit Varma]: and taking simple narratives and making sense of the world through those simple narratives
[Amit Varma]: which cannot possibly reflect the complexity. And it strikes me that, you know, what you
[Amit Varma]: refer to as hyper-ritualization, for example, is an example of that. For example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've written, and I'll quote from your quote, racial and religious stereotyping is used
[Amit Varma]: in marketing communication to telegraphically code values that would be difficult to input
[Amit Varma]: into a small ad format. Now, for example, we might know that Indian women are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is no such thing as the Indian woman. It's just extremely complicated. But when
[Amit Varma]: an advertiser is thinking about how do I appeal to the Indian woman, they have to build up
[Amit Varma]: a simple construction, which obviously evolves over time. Like in one of your books, you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about how, you know, during the Santur commercial, it struck you after the commercial
[Amit Varma]: was made that there's no bindi on the forehead of the lady and you went to your video head
[Amit Varma]: and said, can we use rotoscopy or whatever to put a bindi there? And she said, chill,
[Amit Varma]: you know, no need to worry. And there was no need to worry because that campaign was
[Amit Varma]: such a big success. So it strikes me that one, there is a certain lag and a certain
[Amit Varma]: possible sort of simplisticness with which anybody not just advertising people, but anybody
[Amit Varma]: who's trying to figure out a complex society might, you know, look at a society. Now, the
[Amit Varma]: issue with advertising is that it creates a feedback loop that a simplistic vision of
[Amit Varma]: society then actually goes into the advertising. And I sort of agree with Vonnegut. I'm not
[Amit Varma]: pessimistic or negative about it. But I agree with Vonnegut that commercials are actually
[Amit Varma]: a part of a popular culture. You know, many of the memes and the ways we speak and all
[Amit Varma]: of those things, you know, I was actually in the room when I was an HTA at the time
[Amit Varma]: when nothing official about it, that slogan was coined. I think Anuja Chauhan was a young
[Amit Varma]: copywriter at the job then who came up with it. And so it can create this feedback loop
[Amit Varma]: and therefore this simplistic vision that advertising might have can actually go back
[Amit Varma]: into society and exacerbate that like a couple of examples of this which come to mind is
[Amit Varma]: one is the great colonial example that when the British came to India, they needed to
[Amit Varma]: figure out this incredibly complex countries and their early interlocutors were these elite
[Amit Varma]: Brahmins. And therefore, they form their whole vision of what Hinduism was in India was from
[Amit Varma]: the vision of these early interlocutors, you know, and could actually have played a part
[Amit Varma]: in the further entrenchment of the caste system and looking at Hinduism as one monolithic
[Amit Varma]: thing rather than, you know, something that is far more diverse, which is, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: example that comes to mind of this happening. Is that something that as a person within
[Amit Varma]: advertising and as a very self aware person who is not just thinking what does a consumer
[Amit Varma]: want but who's also thinking how is society changing? Is that something that sort of concerned
[Amit Varma]: you and you looked at closely and also some of the case studies you've spoken about, particularly
[Amit Varma]: for example, I was struck by Maggie as something that in a sense spoke to a need that society
[Amit Varma]: did not know existed and filled it so beautifully that it became a part of culture that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the kid comes home from school, what do what do you have to eat? And the mother
[Amit Varma]: says bus dominate and you know, and that might have been an unexpressed need that I need
[Amit Varma]: to make something quick to give my kids. And suddenly that becomes something cultural and
[Amit Varma]: is a way of sort of advertising shaping a social habit, though not in any deep meaningful
[Amit Varma]: way. So what are your sort of thoughts on this? Is this something you've grappled with?
[Guest]: Well, in a sense, you know, whenever you do any advertising, you do worry a bit saying,
[Guest]: you know, am I like you said, you know, it's an echo chamber, right? So, you know, am I
[Guest]: doing something which may reinforce something wrong in society? And I remember a young account
[Guest]: executive who said, I refuse to work on a fairness screen, right? And then he refused
[Guest]: to work on that brand we were handling. So that kind of protest happens. But, you know,
[Guest]: I don't know whether, suppose I reflect something in advertising, is it going to harden the
[Guest]: societal beliefs, right? And how can I do something different? Like, for example, in
[Guest]: that famous Dara film, where that little boy is waiting there, you know, trying to run
[Guest]: away from home. And that, you know, old man is coming, you know, and he says, Ramu kaka,
[Guest]: I said, Dablu, idhar bete ho, mummy toh jalebi bana rahi hai. Now, when I wrote that in the
[Guest]: book, and I said, it's an old postman. Now, my editor said, how do you know it's an old
[Guest]: postman? I said, look at the semiotic symbols, you know, he's dressed in khaki uniform, he's
[Guest]: on a cycle, he knows the kid, kid knows him. So we had to telegraphically put all that,
[Guest]: you know, so that the consumer can quickly understand that it's a postman. You cannot
[Guest]: sit and explain that he's delivering post and then, you know, you don't have the time,
[Guest]: in 30 seconds, you have to tell that. So in a sense, you take a lot of these shortcuts.
[Guest]: Some of these shortcuts actually reinforce wrong things in society. Like the whole, you
[Guest]: know, the servant, the Ramu, in this case, Ramu kaka was a postman, but, you know, there's
[Guest]: a Ramu's, it's the servant in the house. So the servant is always dressed in dhoti, you
[Guest]: know, whereas the malkin is dressed in a nice thing. So you do that to unfortunately present
[Guest]: some things which should not be presented that way. But you don't have the liberty to
[Guest]: do that. In fact, the chapter on mystery of the missing sari, I've written about how a
[Guest]: lot of brands have moved away from showing women in saris. Though your average consumer
[Guest]: is using a sari, you're showing a woman dressed in trouser and shirt or in churidar and pants
[Guest]: or whatever, because that is the aspirational dress of the urban Indian woman. Everyone
[Guest]: wants to be dressed that way, though they are dressed in saris. And so today, the telegraphic
[Guest]: thing, if someone is dressed in a sari, she's probably 60 years old, or she's a maidservant.
[Guest]: Right? So how do I quickly communicate grandmother? Put her in a sari, put the mother in a pantshirt,
[Guest]: and the kid can be in a pair of jeans. So I quickly established three generations. Right?
[Guest]: So we take some of these shortcuts and maybe reinforcing some wrong things. So I think
[Guest]: I've written that, you know, there is this group of people who are trying to get advertising
[Guest]: people to become sensitive about gender. And how willy-nilly you may actually press the
[Guest]: wrong buttons without realizing. Like there is this wonderful film written by my good
[Guest]: friend Arun Kale about this bunch of 10 boys playing football, right, on a rainy day. And
[Guest]: the goalkeeper is actually polio afflicted. He's got a crutch. And the game is going
[Guest]: on and finally the kick happens, and this goalkeeper dives and saves the ball. Right?
[Guest]: And when this is happening, you know, six kids are watching the game. They're all sitting
[Guest]: on a parapet wall and watching it. All six of them are girls. So without realizing what
[Guest]: have I done, I've said, boys are energetic, boys play football, girls don't. Girls sit
[Guest]: and observe, girls sit and clap. Till I went through that workshop, I didn't realize this.
[Guest]: I said, God, I mean, you've done something wrong. They could have easily made it three
[Guest]: boys and three girls on the parapet and put two girls to play football. No one realized
[Guest]: it. And I keep getting asked questions about why it's such a wonderful thing that Santur
[Guest]: has always showed a girl child. I said, is it because of gender sensitivity, etc, etc.
[Guest]: I said, I wish it was gender sensitive. It was not. It was a purely selfish motive that
[Guest]: a little girl looks much more sweeter than a little boy. And you're selling a beauty
[Guest]: product. When you're selling a beauty product, you want someone who looks beautiful. So,
[Guest]: you know, have a pretty woman and a cute looking daughter makes better sense for a beauty product
[Guest]: than showing a pretty woman and a nice looking boy. But people gave us credits. It's such
[Guest]: a forward thinking, you know, that the girl child, but that was not that way. It was thought
[Guest]: of differently. Sometimes you make the right decision for the wrong reason. And sometimes
[Guest]: you do something without realizing that you're actually doing something wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And, you know, another sort of interesting example, which comes to mind, which you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about in Nawab's News Noodles is, again, the example of Fair and Lovely, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the father doesn't really have much hope of the girl because, you know, she's not a son,
[Amit Varma]: what is she going to do? And she's not now using Fair and Lovely to attract somebody.
[Amit Varma]: She's using it to help her get a job. And she gets a job. And right at the end, you
[Amit Varma]: know, when she takes her father out to a hotel to celebrate, he calls her beta or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember when watching it, nothing struck me, it was just a commercial. When I read
[Amit Varma]: your description of it, again, I kind of almost recoiled saying, you know, how could, which
[Amit Varma]: also shows in a sense that I have changed in the way, you know, I look at the world
[Amit Varma]: change. And I suppose all of us, that's a natural and positive thing. But looking back,
[Amit Varma]: it just seems like such an incredibly regressive commercial. And, indeed, such a, you know,
[Amit Varma]: some would argue, like, I totally understand why the account executive you mentioned, didn't
[Amit Varma]: want to work on the product. You know, that's, that's completely sort of natural and understandable
[Amit Varma]: today. So the thing is that when a brand is sort of in a complex landscape, where for
[Amit Varma]: many people, they would not recoil, they would feel a surge of emotion, a positive emotion
[Amit Varma]: that the father has validated the girl by calling her beta, which was the original intent,
[Amit Varma]: obviously. And at the same time, there is a sliver of the consumer, which doesn't feel
[Amit Varma]: that way. And obviously, I often say India lives in three centuries at once, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the 19th, the 20th, and the 21st. And the 21st is kind of small and vocal and on social
[Amit Varma]: media and virtue signaling a lot, and they're going to jump on you for anything you do.
[Amit Varma]: So that sort of tightrope, how do advertisers and a brand manage that on the one hand, you
[Amit Varma]: want to sort of go in the right direction and do the right things and fight those stereotypes.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, to speak to these larger masses just for, you know, signaling to them
[Amit Varma]: who the mother is and who the daughter is, you know, you might argue the stereotyping
[Amit Varma]: plays a functional role there. And you also don't want to go too far to go out of your
[Amit Varma]: way to signal something to a particular elite bunch, which will piss off the rest of the
[Amit Varma]: people. And you also have to keep an eye on the politics of it, as we've seen from what
[Amit Varma]: happened in the recent Tanishq controversy. You know, so how does one walk this tightrope?
[Amit Varma]: What is sort of how does the advertiser deal with it? Because even if your core consumer
[Amit Varma]: doesn't care about a particular set of values, you might have an entirely different set of
[Amit Varma]: people jumping on you for, you know, who you're not even selling to. So how does one kind
[Amit Varma]: of navigate this? And is this something that you faced in your active days in advertising?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it something that's happening much more now? And you can just step back and say, okay,
[Guest]: not my circus, not my monkey anymore.
[Guest]: You know, I think it's a tough, it's a tough situation, especially in India, because you're
[Guest]: living like you said, in the 18th century, 19th century, and the 20th, and maybe entering
[Guest]: the 21st century, it's a tough job. What you think is a perfectly harmless ad for an ad
[Guest]: turns out to be politically incorrect. I remember, we had done this ad for Tata Indica, which
[Guest]: said box shape, bubble shape, but then gentlemen prefer curves, and a lovely photograph of
[Guest]: the car, right? We all thought it was nice, cute, fun. But you know, God forbid, some
[Guest]: old gentleman actually wrote a letter to Mr. Tata, saying that, this is a very sexist ad,
[Guest]: how did your company run this ad? So, you know, the question came to the marketing team,
[Guest]: which gave it to us, and we said, look, it's over, the ad is not going to appear again.
[Guest]: So that was the reply given to that old gentleman saying, you know, we apologize, and you know,
[Guest]: we made the mistake, and we're not running it again. Then the guy was very happy.
[Guest]: You know, so today, there's a multiple complexity here. Let's look at the fair and lovely and
[Guest]: the, what is called the glow and lovely issue. I mean, is the consumer complaining about
[Guest]: it? No. Does the consumer want to look fair? Yes. But where is the problem? The problem
[Guest]: probably is coming from the global audience, right? The global investors are asking questions
[Guest]: about, you know, you're saying I'm a socially aware corporation, how can you sell a product
[Guest]: like this? Now, they pull out the product, what happens to the shareholder? It is a very,
[Guest]: very profitable brand for them, right? So they're caught in this kind of a never never
[Guest]: land. So not only is India living in 18, 19, 20, or 21st century, there is also maybe an
[Guest]: influencer group sitting in London, who's living in the 22nd century. Right? So you
[Guest]: know, balancing all this is very tough. And I think we did some amount of balancing during
[Guest]: our days. Today, it's becoming even more tougher, right, because of social media. So I think
[Guest]: companies have to be clear that at a point of time, I'll ignore social media, I don't
[Guest]: care. Right? Like what, you know, when when Fair and Lovely did that air roasters ad,
[Guest]: they were panned, right? Social media panned them, saying that, you know, this is, in fact,
[Guest]: some website even rated it as the worst ad of the decade or something like that. But
[Guest]: they said, forget it, this is too small, doesn't matter, we ignore them. Or even that wonderful
[Guest]: Airtel ad, right, where this, the girl is a is a boss, and she goes home. And she's
[Guest]: cooking something. And then she's asking him, what do you have for dinner? I mean, social
[Guest]: media freaked out about it saying, why is she going home and cooking for him? Can't
[Guest]: you advertising guys think of nothing better than women as cooks? But I think Airtel said,
[Guest]: yeah, that's okay. You know, you can rant and rave about it. But we think we have done
[Guest]: it right. Because we've shown a very modern woman. She's a very educated woman. She's
[Guest]: actually her husband's boss. And she's going home and, and she's enjoying the cooking process.
[Guest]: You know, she's dressed nicely and in a whatever, a t-shirt and whatever, and she's making whipping
[Guest]: things up. And she's having fun cooking. It's not that she's toiling in the kitchen with
[Guest]: her prestige pressure cooker and you know, making, she's having fun. So they said, we'll
[Guest]: do it. And I think they ignored social media and they went ahead. Now, Tanishq was complex.
[Guest]: One, it went on YouTube, it didn't go on TV. Maybe if it had gone on TV, positive force
[Guest]: would also, you know, worked in favor of Tanishq. They went on YouTube, which meant the ranters
[Guest]: saw it first before the lovers. And they started ranting about it. And the company decided
[Guest]: to back off, which I think probably they realized that the time and the place was not right
[Guest]: for something like that. You know, so, you know, for example, they did that wonderful
[Guest]: ad with this girl getting married for the second time, doing the saath phera. Now I
[Guest]: could say, someone might say, you know, in our Hindu Rashtra, there is nothing like second
[Guest]: marriage. Ke saath phera kaise kar sakte ho? You know, you can't do it. And someone can
[Guest]: start, you know, yesterday someone protested that, you know, you're insulting Manu Smriti
[Guest]: because, you know, you said Babasaheb Anbekar burnt Manu Smriti. That's a historical fact.
[Guest]: That's a historical fact. Now, so you got to, I don't know, it's very tough to navigate
[Guest]: all this. So you've got to be careful what to avoid. By and large, advertising avoids
[Guest]: religion. Internationally, of course, advertising avoids religion like the plague. I mean, America,
[Guest]: American advertising, there is never any religion in play. You never show multi-religious people
[Guest]: in an American ad. And as you know, and I've written about it, in America, they don't even
[Guest]: collect data about your religious orientation in the census. That data is not collected
[Guest]: because it's seen as privacy, invasion of privacy. Here, not only in India, we collect
[Guest]: religion, we also collect caste and sub-caste and maybe even gothra, whatever, we'll collect
[Guest]: all that. They don't do that. So we are kind of, we need to balance all this so that without,
[Guest]: and then finally, Amit, our job is what in advertising? Our job in advertising is to
[Guest]: sell the brand. So we cannot suddenly put on the mantle of, you know, I'm a social reformer
[Guest]: and therefore I'm going to reform society. That's not your job. Your job, you're being
[Guest]: paid to advertise. You're being paid to sell the product, sell the promise. As long as
[Guest]: you do it well and you don't piss off too many people, I would say keep doing. So it's
[Guest]: become more interesting today. Like you said, you've got to be a little more sensitive.
[Guest]: I don't think in today's world, I would have done that box-shaped, bubble-shaped, you know,
[Guest]: gentleman-proof of curves ad. I learned my lesson. But it's interesting that, you know,
[Guest]: today there are multiple target audiences you need to be wary about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And, you know, I caught you using the phrase, like the plague, which is not a phrase
[Amit Varma]: one should use in 2020, I guess. I just want to sort of, you were talking about the Airtel
[Amit Varma]: ad, which I think is a, you know, a perfect case study to go deeper into this. And I just
[Amit Varma]: want to quickly point out to my listeners what exactly happened in that commercial.
[Amit Varma]: That commercial basically shows an office scene and there's a lady sitting in a cabin
[Amit Varma]: and she's obviously the boss and this male employee of hers walks in and she's not happy
[Amit Varma]: with something he's done or whatever. She wants him to work further on it and he's unhappy
[Amit Varma]: about it. But she says, no, it's got to be done. And she gives you orders and she goes.
[Amit Varma]: And the next shot is she's at home and she's cooked a nice meal. And she does a video call
[Amit Varma]: to this same guy who you realize is her husband. And she says, okay, when are you coming home?
[Amit Varma]: Your food is ready. So it's like a dual role. And I found it on the one hand, for the vast
[Amit Varma]: majority of your audience, I think the signal here would be pretty progressive that women
[Amit Varma]: can work and aspire to great careers, that women can be the boss of men and it need not
[Amit Varma]: be something that hurts a male ego. But at the same time for another constituency, it's
[Amit Varma]: regressive because even though you've shown a, you know, a forward thinking, progressive
[Amit Varma]: woman, you are showing her cooking and therefore, you're going back into the old thing. And,
[Amit Varma]: and there's a similar dilemma, for example, that comes up around say, just sinking back
[Amit Varma]: if you're talking popular culture about the film article 15, which came out, and which
[Amit Varma]: I think most people would say is a very progressive film in the way that it looks at cost and
[Amit Varma]: tackles it head on and all of that. But I witnessed a panel discussion last year at
[Amit Varma]: this festival I'd gone to where the director Anubhav Sinha was being absolutely slammed
[Amit Varma]: because of promoting the white saviour complex. And, you know, why is the main protagonist
[Amit Varma]: a Brahmin? And why couldn't they have had a Dalit protagonist? And this is again, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the guy is made for what for 99.9% of the country is an incredibly progressive film.
[Amit Varma]: And you have a small sliver who are probably just signalling to their peers and looking
[Amit Varma]: for things to outrage about, just kind of going nuts on that. So I can sort of imagine
[Amit Varma]: that that's...
[Guest]: Amit, in fact, in that Airtel film, they don't reveal that they're husband and wife. And
[Guest]: in the mobile phone, when the mobile phone rings, when he picks it up, it says wife,
[Guest]: right? That's how you get revealed. But today, someone may say, why should it be wife? Why
[Guest]: can't they be partner? Why can't they be spouse? You know, so like you said, there are different
[Guest]: people. I remember at that talk, which I gave, I showed the ad of Fast Track, where there
[Guest]: is this little cupboard, which is rocking. And then two girls come out of the cupboard
[Guest]: and they kind of adjust their skirt and they walk off. And the line says, come out of the
[Guest]: closet or something like that. And then I presented it as an example of, you know, propagating
[Guest]: LGBT or whatever, right? I said, very progressive ad and from a very conservative group, Tata,
[Guest]: Titan, etc. At the end of the talk, an elderly gentleman, my age or even older, walks up
[Guest]: to me and said, you said it's very progressive, but what was so progressive? Two girls came
[Guest]: out of the cupboard and they walked away. I said, sir, what were the two girls doing
[Guest]: inside the cupboard? That is the story. And he said, ah, ah, I didn't realize. Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's in fact, what the two girls were doing inside the cupboard, you could say is a classic
[Amit Varma]: example of the seen and the unseen. I'll move on to my next question now, which is on, I
[Amit Varma]: think, a fundamental challenge that advertising has to face. And I'll again, quote your words
[Amit Varma]: about the media explosion over the last 10 years, where you write, quote, the last 10
[Amit Varma]: years have seen an explosion of consumer choice and media consumption. Print is under attack
[Amit Varma]: from digital, even though Indian language print is still vibrant and blooming. Television
[Amit Varma]: has been growing rapidly as well. The numbers are astounding. There were a grand total of
[Amit Varma]: 55 licensed television sets when Nehru died in 1964, about a hundred thousand when Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi declared emergency in 1975, a little over 2 million when the Asian games came to
[Amit Varma]: Delhi in 1982. 34 million families owned a TV set when Manmohan Singh opened up the economy
[Amit Varma]: in 1991. And when Narendra Modi was sworn in as prime minister in 2014, over 60% of
[Amit Varma]: the 250 million homes in India had a television set, stop quote. And now, of course, people
[Amit Varma]: don't only sort of consume video through television, you know, the mobile phones are almost ubiquitous
[Amit Varma]: now. So I have a couple of questions. One, of course, goes back to that famous, almost
[Amit Varma]: cliched quote of John Wanamaker when he said, you know, quote, half the money I spend on
[Amit Varma]: advertising is wasted. The trouble is, I don't know which half, stop quote. And it kind of
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that what has happened is one, media has become very diffused and dispersed
[Amit Varma]: to whatever metrics one comes up for gauging advertising effectiveness can very easily
[Amit Varma]: be gamed. So for example, I remember a time when digital advertising used to be sold on
[Amit Varma]: the basis of we get so many page views, but that's easy to game with crazy pagination
[Amit Varma]: or that, you know, the clicks became a measure, but all measures are easy to game. You don't
[Amit Varma]: really know how efficient advertising very often is. In fact, you have, you know, use
[Amit Varma]: the term spray and pray for digital marketing. And what's happened and I keep pointing out
[Amit Varma]: in the context of journalism, which obviously I know a little bit more about their advertising.
[Amit Varma]: But in the context of journalism, what has happened is that over the last 10 years, the
[Amit Varma]: way people consume and discover information has changed completely. And journalism hasn't
[Amit Varma]: figured it out. And it is completely clueless in that regard. And especially the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: outlets, but frankly, every single outlet more or less hasn't figured out that the way
[Amit Varma]: people are consuming information has changed so completely, and they need to do something
[Amit Varma]: about that, you know, and that might even be one reason that advertising as a business
[Amit Varma]: model seems broken for so many different industries. So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how challenging are these times for advertising itself? Do we need to call
[Amit Varma]: into question how we define advertising and how we, you know, the practice of advertising
[Guest]: itself? So I think that's a tough, tough question to handle, Amit, because it's a, it's a, it's
[Guest]: a huge question and it depends on the product category we are looking at. You know, I was
[Guest]: chatting about this with Professor John Philip Jones, who's written several books on, you
[Guest]: know, advertising effectiveness, and he's got a new book coming out. And he says that
[Guest]: India has for a long, long time been dominated by packaged goods advertisers. You know, the
[Guest]: Unilever, the P&G, the Godrej, the Coke, the Pepsi, etc. He says that this is going to change
[Guest]: because those products, consumers will not want to consume based on advertising. They
[Guest]: will want to consume based on whatever, discovery or pricing, etc. And other products will rise
[Guest]: to the top. It could be healthcare, already wasting healthcare, ed tech, technology, you
[Guest]: know, those will rise. But my feeling is, you know, that we keep saying the 30 second
[Guest]: spot is dead. The hundred column centimeter ad is dead. I mean, I remember attending an
[Guest]: FCB global conference in 1997 when Bruce Mason went on stage. I think it was Phoenix, Arizona,
[Guest]: and he announced that the 30 second ad is dead. You guys better learn what is the new
[Guest]: advertising going to be. At that time, when he predicted 30 second ad is dead, it was
[Guest]: not because of online. It was because of video recorders, right? There was that fancy thing
[Guest]: which was a rage in the US and people said people will not watch the ad. They will record
[Guest]: it and the recorder will DVRs, I think, right? DVRs. They'll record it. It didn't happen,
[Guest]: right? 30 second ad continued to 97, 2000, 2017. 30 second ad is still around. So my
[Guest]: feeling is, there's an old comment, right? Television killed the radio star. It doesn't
[Guest]: kill the radio star. It kind of made the radio star do something different. Like, for example,
[Guest]: what you're doing, a podcast. So I don't think television will go away. I don't think print
[Guest]: will go away. But in print, since you're in print and I also have some exposure because
[Guest]: I sit on the board of The Hindu. So we always have the dilemma, is the news consumer who's
[Guest]: consuming newspaper different from the news consumer who's consuming online version? Till
[Guest]: now, it was chalk and cheese. The person reading the newspaper wants more detail, doesn't want
[Guest]: So he would rather have a headline saying Amit Verma interviews serial author Ambi Parmeshwaran
[Guest]: and some interesting insights. Whereas the online version will probably say 10 things
[Guest]: to learn from Amit Verma and Ambi, right? Or 10 mistakes Ambi and Amit Verma discovered
[Guest]: when they talked. So the online is always a little sensational. But I don't know. If
[Guest]: more and more paper people are going to go to online, will that online also have to change?
[Guest]: Will it start? I don't think Wall Street Journal or New York Times are pandering to that bus
[Guest]: feed and the witty feed audience, right? They are still maintaining integrity. So that I
[Guest]: think will happen. As far as advertising is concerned, the big problem, Amit, is attribution.
[Guest]: Ideally, you could say, why do I need anything? I just do search. But search is the last mile.
[Guest]: So clients are figuring out that this pray and pray is not working. Unfortunately, in
[Guest]: India, what has happened is YouTube has just become another television channel. So you
[Guest]: buy, you know, what is the cost per million? So cost per thousand on Hindi GEC is, whatever,
[Guest]: 50, 80 rupees. Cost per thousand on YouTube, with slightly better targeting, is, say, 100
[Guest]: rupees, 200 rupees, 300 rupees. Same thing with Facebook. Some of the clients I work
[Guest]: with saying, hey, A. Clarke, if you spend one lakh, you get one million views on Facebook.
[Guest]: I said, who? Generally anyone, right? So it's not then that there is nothing. Then that
[Guest]: defeats the purpose of digital. Digital is supposed to be targeting, right?
[Guest]: So I think smarter clients are figuring out. They're saying that I need to keep running
[Guest]: experiments. I need to keep collecting data. I need to understand attribution a little
[Guest]: better, right? And I think even Facebook and all these guys are trying to educate clients
[Guest]: and saying, look, we can do the full, what they call the full stack or the full pipeline
[Guest]: managing and full pipeline monitoring. But it's coming. I think in the next five years,
[Guest]: we will see a lot of that happening in advertising. And another thing, which I think high time
[Guest]: it happened, is that agencies and clients are now figuring out that it's completely
[Guest]: unproductive to have multiple people working on the same brand.
[Guest]: So I think, I've been speaking to some of the agency people are saying, look, we handle
[Guest]: everything for this client, right? I handle this, for example, Nissan, and I handle all
[Guest]: that happens on Nissan. I do the print, I do TV, I do online, I do search, I do everything
[Guest]: because I understand the brand, I do everything. So I think the whole, what we call 360 degrees,
[Guest]: I think it's coming back. And some of the smarter clients are saying, look, let's not
[Guest]: have multiple agencies running amok with our brand. We need to put all that with someone
[Guest]: whom we can trust. If that happened, then it's good for the agencies. They'll be able
[Guest]: to command a premium, invest. The problem is in the good old days, when the client came
[Guest]: to an agency, the agency started investing, started investing in doing your own research,
[Guest]: understanding the product category, understanding the consumers. So you actually became a good
[Guest]: sounding board for your client. I wish if that happens, that'll be very good for everyone.
[Amit Varma]: No, I actually agree with you about what you said about that, the online reader isn't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: looking for a simplistic kind of experience of buzzfeed clickbait, you know, five words
[Amit Varma]: of wisdom from Ambi Parmeshwaran today, or, you know, why Amit Verma was strangled by
[Amit Varma]: one of his guests on live zoom recording. But for me, what I see and in a sense, my
[Amit Varma]: podcast exemplifies that is that there is also a great hunger for depth and nuance,
[Amit Varma]: which you often don't get in many other sources. And all of us in that sense contain multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: right? I am the same guy who is hitting clickbait and who is, you know, who's got 60 tabs open
[Amit Varma]: on his YouTube, but also the person who listened to a three hour podcast and will read a book
[Amit Varma]: and take notes diligently. But I have a sort of a more fundamental thought on this. And
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know if this is a question, but I'm just putting this thought out there for
[Amit Varma]: my listeners. Because from a content creators point of view, I've been thinking about this
[Amit Varma]: a lot recently, which is that look, you know, where was the scope for advertising to even
[Amit Varma]: exist to begin with? And part of it, I think comes because when a content creator creates
[Amit Varma]: something of value earlier, there was no way to monetize that. But advertising, advertising
[Amit Varma]: was a big part of the mix. So everyone who's listening to this podcast, obviously is valuing
[Amit Varma]: it is paying for it with their time because time is money. So if you spend like say one
[Amit Varma]: and a half hours listening to my three hour conversation at double speed, that one and
[Amit Varma]: a half hours is worth a lot to you. And you're paying for it. And you would actually be willing
[Amit Varma]: to pay for it directly, except that earlier, there was no mechanism to do so there was
[Amit Varma]: too much friction, you can't pay for each and everything you consume. So one via medium
[Amit Varma]: for that is advertising where advertisers come in and they buy those eyeballs from me,
[Amit Varma]: the content creator, or more likely because I can't scale on my own, I would sell my content
[Amit Varma]: to a platform, the platform would get the collect the eyeballs, and advertising would
[Amit Varma]: come in. What is now happening, and it's very exciting and is going to accelerate is that
[Amit Varma]: more and more for creators, at this point in time, possibly only for elite creators,
[Amit Varma]: but more and more for creators, it becomes possible to kind of get that value from the
[Amit Varma]: reader or the consumer or whatever you're creating directly, you do not need the platform
[Amit Varma]: like I might literally even though I'm on the roster of the Times of India still as
[Amit Varma]: a columnist, I think it is plausible that I might never write for a newspaper again,
[Amit Varma]: because I don't need to, I am reaching those people directly, they are discovering and
[Amit Varma]: navigating content differently. And there are various other ways of monetizing which
[Amit Varma]: are working out for me, which have nothing to do at all with advertising. Now, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that I have other ways of direct monetizing working out for me, that automatically
[Amit Varma]: makes me an elite creator, and it's not necessary that that will percolate through. But I think
[Amit Varma]: new platforms will come in new ways of monetizing will come. So my very rambly sort of thought,
[Amit Varma]: then is that what is the advertiser to do? Because to me, advertising was a mechanism
[Amit Varma]: for creators to capture some of the value they make for their content. So do you have
[Guest]: any thoughts on this? I think it's it's a it's a great narrative. What you said is right
[Guest]: today, there is an audience for a 15 minute podcast, and there is also an audience for
[Guest]: a one hour podcast. So the audience is multiplying. Now, let's pull back. Where did advertising
[Guest]: come from? Advertising came to piggyback, like you said, on audiences, early newspapers,
[Guest]: for example, you know, that's where it started, early newspapers started. And then advertisers
[Guest]: became a little greedy. And they said, Look, we need more audiences. So they went and created
[Guest]: the original soap opera on on radio. It was advertising created, it was created by Procter
[Guest]: and Gamble, because they said, let's get more people to come in, come and watch this. Going,
[Guest]: I mean, so that that equation is continued, and you gave, gave content free to the consumer,
[Guest]: but the consumer paid you with their time. And what you got from the consumer was attention.
[Guest]: And for their attention, you delivered five messages, six messages to them. But today,
[Guest]: I think there is a lot of opening up happening. Thanks to digital technology today, you can
[Guest]: actually collect money from every listener, right? So you can technically say, you want
[Guest]: to, you know, what Steve Jobs did in a phenomenal way, right? $1.99 for a song, and he could
[Guest]: sell songs, right? Till then, it was inconceivable, right? Today, there are aggregators who are
[Guest]: saying, Look, you don't want to subscribe to New York Times, you want one article, pay
[Guest]: one cent. You know, New York Times is happy, they get paid one cent for it, whatever, you
[Guest]: know. So that's going to happen more and more, that there are going to be aggregators who
[Guest]: come in. So I think this earlier pie in India, even the television pie in India was 90% advertising,
[Guest]: 10% subscription, and that is slowly changing, right? It's become 55-45. Unfortunately, in
[Guest]: India, and you write for Times of India, I write for Business Standard, and I write occasionally
[Guest]: for ET. The problem is English media in India, English newspapers are highly subsidized,
[Guest]: right? English newspapers in India today charge a cover price, which is even lower than that
[Guest]: of a Hindi newspaper, paper to paper, right? In fact, ideally, English paper should be
[Guest]: charging more than Hindi paper, right? Because it's supposed to be elite audience. But you
[Guest]: know, for whatever reason, Times of India figured out that I need to drive readership,
[Guest]: and they've driven readership, and they've kept the price low. But going forward, I think
[Guest]: we will see these multiple buckets getting filled. It could be the bucket of, say, clean
[Guest]: advertising, a bucket of what we call subscription fees. Maybe, you know, in film, in the other
[Guest]: debate which I was having with a friend of mine, saying that, look, if 50% of television
[Guest]: audience is going to go to OTT, and OTT doesn't have ads, what is going to be the advertising
[Guest]: of the future? It will be product placement, right? Where your brand gets placed inside
[Guest]: an ad. I mean, the first big such product placement was American Idol and Coca-Cola.
[Guest]: Coca-Cola paid a million dollars to just have the Coke can in front of the American Idol
[Guest]: jury members. And that partnership continued for something like 10 years. One million dollars
[Guest]: just to have the can there. And now, you're having OTT serials coming. And I'm sure, you
[Guest]: know, brands will say, and producers will say that. Producers will say, look, and they
[Guest]: will tell Amazon or they'll tell Netflix, look, we are going to monetize this series.
[Guest]: We're going to have a car sponsor. We're going to have a shooting sponsor. We're going to
[Guest]: have this. We're going to make, you know, a crore of rupees from them. Is it okay with
[Guest]: you guys? Right? So, that will start happening. And I remember seeing that serial with Sushmita
[Guest]: Sen on Disney, right? About this Rajasthan drug thing. Maybe you didn't see it. And she
[Guest]: was driving an Audi all the time, right? A lot of film happens in that Audi. I said,
[Guest]: why Audi? Did Audi pay for it? You know, if they did, smart. They paid for it. But otherwise,
[Guest]: I would say, why did Ram Madhwani use Audi? Right? He should have, you know, Ram is from
[Guest]: advertising. So, he would have probably figured out that, you know, that he'll get a car sponsor.
[Guest]: So, those things are going to happen. So, one other hypothesis I have, I don't know
[Guest]: whether it really happens, is that 20 years from now, advertising will be so intuitive
[Guest]: that you will not even realize it's advertising. That you're watching James Bond and the guy
[Guest]: is ordering whatever, you know, Sky Vodka. You don't even realize. And then after the
[Guest]: movie, you go for a drink and you order Sky. You don't even realize that, you know, what
[Guest]: if you go back to Ernest Dixcher and this whole thing about hidden persuaders was that,
[Guest]: you know, that you can actually bias consumers. So that, I think, maybe that's too futuristic,
[Guest]: but that may happen. That you will have, every content creator will have four, five, six
[Guest]: different buckets from which he can make his money. And one has to realize that, what are
[Guest]: those four, five buckets? And how can I make money without upsetting these? And obviously,
[Guest]: if you put too many ads, no one will come to your podcast. Right? If you charge too
[Guest]: much, no one is going to come. Right? So you need to find that the right balance. And I
[Guest]: think everyone will start finding that over a period of time.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said about, you know, how in the future, you know, we might be responding
[Amit Varma]: to advertising all the time without even realizing it. And, you know, anything that sounds futuristic
[Amit Varma]: but plausible is something that will inevitably happen at some point, right? It will inevitably
[Amit Varma]: happen at some point. So does that worry you? Does it worry you that there'll be so much
[Amit Varma]: sort of, I won't even call it surveillance, because it's not really humans doing the surveillance,
[Amit Varma]: it's more algorithms who know every sort of rug of the individual, as it were. Does that
[Amit Varma]: worry you? Or do you think that, fine, it's all in our service anyway, so why does it
[Guest]: matter?
[Guest]: It is a little worrying, but I think consumers will wake up to it. Because, you know, you
[Guest]: suddenly go and search for something, and then you go to Facebook, you suddenly see
[Guest]: an ad for that, and you realize that, yeah, there is some cookie which is doing this.
[Guest]: And today, you know, especially those people who have seen, you know, Social Dilemma are
[Guest]: even more sensitive to this, but consumers will wake up to it. And I think companies
[Guest]: are also now... I was talking to a friend of mine who's in the algorithm space, and
[Guest]: he was saying that, like Apple, which is saying that, you know, all the cookies are going
[Guest]: to be in the phone. So it'll be in the phone. So it'll be totally privacy protected. Apparently,
[Guest]: Android is going to do the same thing. So maybe those things will happen as a result,
[Guest]: this kind of blatant.
[Guest]: And you know, first time I was hit by this, Amit, you won't believe it, was about almost
[Guest]: 15 years ago, when I was taking a flight and I land in Kochi, and I switch on my, those
[Guest]: days, BPL mobile phone, and I get an SMS message saying that, you know, this Kochi hotel has
[Guest]: got a great offer. I said, shit, you know, I mean, I didn't know that existed, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you land in Kochi, and then, obviously, the mobile operator knows where I am. And
[Guest]: they say, okay, you want a hotel? Here is a hotel. That's today so natural. You go and
[Guest]: search for something, you get served something, you know, it's so natural. And I think consumers
[Guest]: are... consumers will slowly realize it's, you know, I think it'll evolve in its own
[Guest]: way. You know, in the early days, consumer may have got very biased. I was looking for
[Guest]: a Zodiac white shirt, and look at it on Facebook. You know, it's like, you know, but, you know,
[Guest]: tomorrow, okay, so this is an algorithm. So it's there. Okay, fine. I may not buy it still,
[Guest]: if I'm not happy. So that could happen. Consumer will also evolve, right? Consumer will evolve,
[Guest]: and consumers are pretty smart, whether we... whatever the algorithm may say, consumers
[Guest]: will figure out what they do, what they like, what they don't like. And I think that's going
[Guest]: to happen. That consumers will wake up to all these hidden persuader tricks.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And in fact, you know, I think one danger also is of sort of treating consumers condescendingly
[Amit Varma]: as if they are sheep who don't have agency and can't sort of see all this for themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And I also want to assure my listeners that there is no product placement on this episode.
[Amit Varma]: So although you have heard the names of a lot of brands, and Ambi just mentioned Zodiac,
[Amit Varma]: there is no product placement at all. We will have none of that happening here. So you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's time to get to your latest book Spring. But before that, I'd actually like you to
[Amit Varma]: sort of say a few words about Sponge because I enjoyed that as well. And I must confess
[Amit Varma]: that I hadn't read that earlier. You know, while prepping for this episode, I thought
[Amit Varma]: I should read a bunch of your books. And I enjoyed Sponge also, especially as a framework
[Amit Varma]: for how one should think about just the process of learning, although you've sort of positioned
[Amit Varma]: it more towards leadership and so on. But so tell me a little bit about how the idea
[Amit Varma]: for the book came about. And if you can just sort of, I mean, I will, of course, urge all
[Amit Varma]: my listeners to kindly buy this and especially Nawab's noodles as well, because it is so
[Amit Varma]: much about advertising in that which we haven't spoken about such as changing gender roles,
[Amit Varma]: how children are used, you know, the use of celebs in advertising and so much else that
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to ask, but that would take another five hours. But tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: Sponge how it came about and, and it feels that all of these books, Sponge, Spring now,
[Amit Varma]: even though they are sort of in a sense, self help books where you're sort of sharing insights
[Amit Varma]: and lessons and so on. At another level, they're also deeply personal, which comes out in the
[Amit Varma]: narrative that these are life lessons that you have learned. And therefore, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're kind of sharing that with the world. So tell me a bit about Sponge.
[Guest]: Okay, Sponge, actually, the idea for Sponge came a long time back and I was walking in
[Guest]: our IM Cal campus with an old friend of mine. And he is a big professor in the US and he
[Guest]: consults with a lot of big companies. And he was sharing his anguish and he said, look,
[Guest]: Rambi, you know, I deal with all these CEOs in the US and a lot of them, only thing they
[Guest]: know is how to manage the board. I said, what do you mean? He said, no, yeah, they don't
[Guest]: understand strategy. They don't understand anything. And it's just how to go past every
[Guest]: quarter and how to manage the board. Is that your experience? And that's when I started
[Guest]: thinking back and I told him, look, actually, my experience is the opposite. You know, I've
[Guest]: been, maybe I've been lucky, but I've met so many CEOs in Indian business and they've
[Guest]: all been delightful. You learn so much from them. Yes, they are challenging. Some of them
[Guest]: are a little rude. Some of them push you too hard, but you know, very, very, you know,
[Guest]: you learn so much from, you know, from, I've learned, I mean, I said, I'm thankful that
[Guest]: I, from my early stage in career, and I've had lucky to work with so many CEOs and I've
[Guest]: learned a lot. And we kept talking about that, stayed in the back of my mind. And so when
[Guest]: Nawab Noodle came out and I was sitting with Anish Shandy, who's my agent, and we were
[Guest]: happy with how the book was doing. So he said, what next? So, and I said, look, I want to
[Guest]: write about what you can learn from clients. So he said, can you tell me a story? And I
[Guest]: narrated my, there's there in the book, right? When how Mr. Tata decided to drop everything
[Guest]: and come to the NCPA to check the color of the car. I mean, that's, that's an amazing
[Guest]: attention to detail, but also the passion of the man, what, you know, the fact that
[Guest]: he's so passionate about the business and, and he looks at these, these micro details
[Guest]: and he dropped everything and came there to spend an hour to check the color of the car.
[Guest]: And I, he said, yeah, great. He said, write two, three chapters. And I, and I, and I wrote
[Guest]: those, you know, I think 20, 24, 27 chapters I wrote, and then, and then I ran out and,
[Guest]: and he asked, you know, I said, that's it, you know, and I said, I will also write something
[Guest]: which is completely unexpected. I've written about account executives from whom I've learned
[Guest]: and even written about a driver, you know, an office driver in, in Hyderabad office,
[Guest]: Gausbai. And I wrote one chapter on him because I think I learned something from him. You
[Guest]: know, so the hypothesis is whether you're a senior, junior, you will meet a lot, you
[Guest]: know, in B2B, Amit, in B2B marketing, there's always a buyer seller fight. You know, the
[Guest]: customer is always seen as someone demanding a low price, making unreasonable demands of
[Guest]: you, putting pressure on you. I said, no, I want to change the narrative. I said, look,
[Guest]: you can learn from every one of your customers. If you approach the situation with that mindset.
[Guest]: And that was the reason for, for writing that book. And I've kind of dedicated it to all
[Guest]: the, all the wonderful clients I've had in my life. And I, and I remember the book talk,
[Guest]: which I gave, Sam Balsara of Madison asked me a cheeky question saying, Ambi, does it
[Guest]: mean you only had good clients? So I said, no, you know, I was a good agency, so I only
[Guest]: got good clients. I don't know what kind of an agency you're running. I don't know what
[Guest]: kind of clients you're getting. So he laughed, he said, yeah, good one. So, but the fact
[Guest]: is obviously, you know, I've had tough times with clients and those, in fact, one or two
[Guest]: of those stories are also in the book saying, you know, really tough clients. I mean, clients
[Guest]: will insult you, but then you can, you can manage it. You can manage that situation is
[Guest]: all I'm saying. And some of these stories I've told my, my young colleagues, you know,
[Guest]: that this young pup of a brand manager said, I will sack your agency. And I was, you know,
[Guest]: average or whatever. And I, and I had to tell him, listen, Amit, you can't sack the agency.
[Guest]: Your father can't sack the agency. Your grandfather can't sack the agency. And I don't think you
[Guest]: know your great-grandfather. So don't talk shit. I was a one-year-old guy in the advertising,
[Guest]: right? And this was a brand manager in a large company. I mean, that was really crazy to
[Guest]: say that. But I said that, I don't know why he backed off. He said, no, no, why are you
[Guest]: getting upset? I was just saying, I need the poster in two days. And you're saying all
[Guest]: this to me. I will not sign. Where am I? I'm not going to, he virtually started crying.
[Guest]: Can I tell these guys, look guys, you know, you know, barking dogs never bite. So don't
[Guest]: get scared. If a customer tells you, I will sack you, but be worried. If the customer
[Guest]: doesn't tell you that he'll sack you, but watch out the smoke signals. And, and those
[Guest]: are the clients who will actually sack you. So it was putting it together. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That was such a filmy dialogue by you. I think all the listeners will suddenly be sitting
[Amit Varma]: up in that chair that your father can't sack me, your grandfather can't sack me. Marvelous
[Amit Varma]: looking at Ambi Parmeswaran with renewed respect. So, you know, one more question about the
[Amit Varma]: book before we move on. So, you know, I enjoyed all your personal anecdotes about Ratan Tata,
[Amit Varma]: about Rohinton Aga, about Hemur Amaya, some fantastic stories, but I was particularly
[Amit Varma]: struck by your anecdote about Varghese Kurien. And I'll quickly recap it for the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of my listeners that Ambi and his team went to present something to Varghese Kurien and
[Amit Varma]: they're presenting this campaign. And somebody in Varghese Kurien's team says, wait a minute,
[Amit Varma]: that blue is a bit of an issue. Can we do something about that blue? At which point
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Kurien turns to this young pup in his organization and says, dekho beta, not in
[Amit Varma]: so many words, obviously, but essentially that, listen, imagine a building with five
[Amit Varma]: pillars. And if you tell the architect, I want it to stand only on two pillars and the
[Amit Varma]: architect does that and it falls, are you going to blame the architect? So similarly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, don't mess around here. If you have any feedback, give it to them, but don't give
[Amit Varma]: arbitrary orders ki isko nikaalo, usko nikaalo. And I thought that, you know, what struck
[Amit Varma]: me about that was the humility of the man that despite having reached where he has reached
[Amit Varma]: and achieved all that he has achieved, you're willing to sit back and acknowledge that my
[Amit Varma]: knowledge is limited. And I should keep that in mind when I sort of engage with the world.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that that is in fact identical to the metaphor of the sponge that you're
[Amit Varma]: bringing out, that the sponge has a sort of functional humility built into it, that it
[Amit Varma]: will just absorb all the water, take the nutrients and then let the water seep out of it. So
[Amit Varma]: my larger question, based on the fact that you have, of course, met many more CEOs and
[Amit Varma]: important people than I have, how important a characteristic is humility in people achieving
[Amit Varma]: excellence and, you know, reaching where they reach?
[Guest]: I think, you know, in several stories I've written, I've recounted, you know, that some
[Guest]: of the wonderful people I've met are the most humble people, right? I mean, the leaders,
[Guest]: whether it was Rohit and Agha, who I used to call him as an account executive, I used
[Guest]: to call him and he used to take the call and I say, sir, you know, we have money shortage,
[Guest]: we need money and he used to talk to me. So we got this thing, it's going to Russia, once
[Guest]: I get there. I mean, so whether it was, you know, so I think humility is extremely, extremely
[Guest]: important in a CEO. In any leader, forget about CEO, any leader have to be humble, have
[Guest]: to be ready to listen to people around him, whether it is a young colleague or it is a
[Guest]: peer. So decide, you know, I think that's a story which I've narrated about Dr. Kurian
[Guest]: that, you know, once they identify a partner to work with, then the partner is always right,
[Guest]: till they probably mess up in a big way. But, you know, you select carefully, you don't
[Guest]: select someone who will mess up in a big way, right? So you select carefully, after that
[Guest]: you trust the partner, right? So in advertising, you work with a photographer, you trust the
[Guest]: photographer generally. You work with a filmmaker and you say, I don't want the music and I
[Guest]: remember we made some film and the brief was, we don't want a jingle. But the director comes
[Guest]: and says, no, I've done a jingle. And you know, for a fact, a jingle costs him money.
[Guest]: Putting some simple music is costing much less than say recording voice, et cetera.
[Guest]: But so you admire the guy saying, you know, you're committed to this, fine, we'll watch
[Guest]: it. And then if you don't like it, it'll be rejected. So you got to surround yourself
[Guest]: with associates, with partners whom you can trust. And that will only come if you are
[Guest]: humble and you're not full of yourself saying, you know, I'm the greatest guy, I have the
[Guest]: biggest ideas, you know, I'm the smartest guy. No, that's not the way to ongoing success.
[Amit Varma]: And that brings us to your latest book. And you actually mentioned the sort of the genesis
[Amit Varma]: story of the idea for the book, that you were giving a talk about sponge at, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: university campus. And at the end of it, this young girl in the last, near the last to ask
[Amit Varma]: you a question that, you know, all this is okay for you to say you have access to all
[Amit Varma]: these CEOs, you can learn for them. But you know, for most of us, we just face rejection
[Amit Varma]: and everything we do, how do we sort of cope with rejection, at which point you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that they expected you to sheepishly not have much to say, because you have been so
[Amit Varma]: privileged. But instead, you gave a 10 minute talk where you spoke about all the rejections
[Amit Varma]: in your life and how they shaped you and got a standing ovation at the end of it and thus
[Amit Varma]: was born spring bouncing back from a rejection, which is on the stands now. And I encourage
[Amit Varma]: everyone to kind of pick it up. So tell me a bit about this, like, you know, is it in
[Amit Varma]: hindsight that you look back at the times that you face rejection, for example, you
[Amit Varma]: know, from Unilever twice when you were in IIT Madras, and then IEM Calcutta, and then
[Amit Varma]: you sort of draw from that or is rejection something you actually thought about at all
[Amit Varma]: the different times you actually got rejected? And, you know, built a framework around that
[Amit Varma]: to sort of deal with that? Or is it you know, the accumulated wisdom of a lived lifetime
[Amit Varma]: sort of looked at in hindsight?
[Guest]: It's a combination. I think I thank that girl for asking that question. And even now, you
[Guest]: know, I sent this book to my old boss. And he also asked, what rejection have you faced,
[Guest]: yaar? So I said, you know, I've written a book, please read it, you know. So I think
[Guest]: some of this is hindsight, you know, you realize that at that time, you did face that rejection
[Guest]: and you managed to handle it. And you handle it in a particular way. Some of it is kind
[Guest]: of, you know, reflection of what happened in the past. And some of it could be live,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, the Hindustan Lever summer internship was live. It was a rejection which
[Guest]: hurt me. I didn't sleep that night. But then I said, look, I cannot continue like this.
[Guest]: I cannot continue applying to Hindustan Lever and getting rejected. This is not on, you
[Guest]: know, this is not my life. You know, I need to figure out what I enjoy doing. And it gave
[Guest]: me that whole power of, you know, redirection and I explored a new area. And, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, the two months in Calcutta, I enjoyed different types of cuisine. I went to my first
[Guest]: jazz concert. I started understanding what was jazz. You know, so it was so enriching
[Guest]: than, you know, going around, let's say, some Jabalpur market and, you know, doing some
[Guest]: market research study for a packaged goods company. It was so much more enriching.
[Guest]: So some of those are live, you know, you know that, you know, you've been rejected. You
[Guest]: know, you can handle it in one way, but you handle it. Like I give an example of the rejection
[Guest]: which we had with Hyundai, right? When we faced, you know, we pitched and we knew we
[Guest]: were not getting it. And at that time we said, look, we are not getting this. What are we
[Guest]: doing wrong? And then we figured out you cannot win a big car client by carrying three layouts
[Guest]: and two scripts. It's not going to work. You need to rethink the whole thing. And you need
[Guest]: to immerse yourself in the category. And this is what we did. And then we got the Tata Motors
[Guest]: business. So some of those are live. Some of those are like, you think back, you know,
[Guest]: like I would have narrated a story about my grandfather. You know, at that time I was
[Guest]: a kid, right? I was probably eight years old, something like that. At that time I didn't
[Guest]: realize the momentousness of that event. That, you know, Prime Minister's car was supposed
[Guest]: to stop in front of my grandfather's business, business premise. And my granddad was supposed
[Guest]: to shake his hand and garland him. Okay. I mean, it's such a, such a huge honor, right?
[Guest]: And the car just drives by. Did my grandfather get upset? No. He didn't, you know, he didn't
[Guest]: take it personally. He said, no, it's okay. They didn't stop. Fine. No problem. You know,
[Guest]: I didn't ask for it. It came my way. It's not going to happen. It's okay. As it turned
[Guest]: out, you know, on the return trip, the car came and stopped and my grandfather actually
[Guest]: met the Prime Minister and garlanded him and all that. So, so I, but that for one hour,
[Guest]: one hour, I did not see him say one bad word about anyone. I was a little kid hanging around
[Guest]: there on the side, just watching what was going on. You know, I mean, uh, people are,
[Guest]: you know, ranting and raving and all that, but the grandfather was cool. Okay. No problem.
[Amit Varma]: I said, wow. Even someone who had reason to say it's Nehru's fault didn't say it.
[Guest]: Yeah. Nehru or Kamaraj's fault, or probably that, that, that cop, rider's fault wouldn't
[Guest]: stop. But you know, but he didn't, he didn't blame anyone. He didn't say anything. Yeah.
[Guest]: He could have actually ranted and raved about Nehru and he would have been way ahead of
[Guest]: his time. Uh, you know, but, uh, he didn't do that. And that, you know, if I had not
[Guest]: started writing this book and started digging deeper into rejection and like, like we discussed,
[Guest]: like you don't start writing a book, you form some kind of an idea and you start reading.
[Guest]: And I, and I started reading books on resilience, about six, seven books on resilience. I started
[Guest]: reading articles. I went, uh, you know, psychology today is a fabulous website. I read all those
[Guest]: articles. I went through some academic journals and then I came across this term, don't take
[Guest]: it personally. And then the story came alive in my mind. You know, when I read that, you
[Guest]: know, what do you mean by don't take it personally? And then I linked that my grandfather's story
[Guest]: to the concept of don't take it personally. So, you know, you read, read, read, read,
[Guest]: and then you pick up something and then you connect it. Uh, even that, you know, APJ Abdul
[Guest]: Kalam story about the inner critic and all that, that I read that story in a different
[Guest]: book and I said, look, what must he have gone through when the so-called first SLV literally
[Guest]: came down in 317 seconds? And what did Professor Satish Dhawan do to protect Dr. Kalam and
[Guest]: how Dr. Kalam remembers that, you know, so vividly and, and that, you know, how he overcame
[Guest]: that failure or that rejection to then become a, you know, very, very successful, uh, you
[Guest]: know, uh, satellite launching technologist, uh, you know, among other things. So, and
[Guest]: you, you know, you have one or two stories in mind, you start reading, reading, reading,
[Guest]: and then you start suddenly start connecting, saying, you know, I want to write about this.
[Guest]: I want to write about that. Where's the story? And you go back. And the, what I also decided
[Guest]: this book, I will, you know, sponge is all about my stories, uh, especially FCB Ulka,
[Guest]: a lot of those stories. I said, spring will have minimum, uh, FCB Ulka stories and maximum
[Guest]: other stories. So I, I spoke with academicians. I spoke with very senior bureaucrats. I spoke
[Guest]: with sports personnel, uh, you know, Olympians. And then I started pulling out their stories
[Guest]: into the book, startup entrepreneurs. I started putting that in the story. So this book is
[Guest]: a little bit, uh, it's not just my advertising, uh, stories. It's, it's a lot more, uh, from,
[Guest]: you know, there are startup entrepreneurs in there, there are academicians in there,
[Guest]: there are Olympians, there are authors, uh, musicians. There are probably 60 different
[Guest]: stories in this book. And probably six of them are from my life and the others are from
[Guest]: outside, you know? So, uh, some of the stories are so sensitive that I've hidden the name,
[Guest]: but you know, someone, some reviewer called me, he said, are these all true stories? I
[Guest]: said, yes. Every single story there is true. If I've not put the person's name, it happened.
[Guest]: I didn't put the name, not to embarrass him, embarrass him or her. Right? So everyone,
[Guest]: every single story there is true. So it was great fun writing it. And, and this book is
[Guest]: actually aimed at the slightly younger target audience. So when someone writes to me, saying
[Guest]: enjoyed the book, et cetera, I say, yeah, give, give it to your son or give it to your
[Guest]: daughter or give it to your neighbor's kid or give it to your nephew or niece. You know,
[Guest]: if they, especially if they are 19, 20, 25, uh, they will find it a very useful read.
[Guest]: So thank you. I think this is a different book to write. Interesting.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. I loved it and found it so insightful, not just for the 20 year old, but also for
[Amit Varma]: someone in his mid forties, like me, I guess, compared to you, I am the slightly younger
[Guest]: audience.
[Guest]: You're a spring chicken.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a, I'm a spring chicken. I was, I was, uh, you know, one of your insights was struck
[Amit Varma]: me, reminded me of something that happened in my poker days where a bunch of us veterans
[Amit Varma]: were sitting around and this young guy comes and he says, you know, I'm playing so well,
[Amit Varma]: nobody ever calls my bluffs at which point we all laughed. And I told him that, listen,
[Amit Varma]: if no one ever calls your bluffs, it means you're not bluffing enough because obviously
[Amit Varma]: the optimal level of bluffing will mean that some of your bluffs get called.
[Amit Varma]: And I was reminded of this by this lovely quote in your book, which is, uh, and I want
[Amit Varma]: all the 20 year olds kindly to listen to this and remember this quote. If you have not faced
[Amit Varma]: rejection, maybe you have not tried hard enough, stop quote. And elsewhere, you quote, as in
[Amit Varma]: PMG as saying, quote, if people are not laughing at your dreams, your dreams are too small,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And all of it was very inspiring. I mean, it actually sort of gave me a warm glow. When
[Amit Varma]: I look back at the various times I have been rejected because I can use these narratives
[Amit Varma]: to sort of, uh, frame it. Um, so, you know, I've, I've taken a lot of your time today
[Amit Varma]: and I know you're also looking forward to, uh, you know, getting to lunch. So I would
[Amit Varma]: ask all my listeners not to reject your wonderful book and to immediately go out and buy spring
[Amit Varma]: bouncing back from rejection. But before that, a sort of a final question from you that one
[Amit Varma]: of the things that I realized while going through your books, while watching your videos
[Amit Varma]: and so on is that over this life that you have lived, you have actually made a conscious
[Amit Varma]: effort to write about all of this wisdom that you have accumulated.
[Amit Varma]: And at the end, you know, thankfully the world gets to benefit from it because we get these
[Amit Varma]: books and we get those videos and all of that. And there are a lot of gems in there. But
[Amit Varma]: if you were to today encounter the 20 year old Ambi Parmeswaran, maybe the sort of the
[Amit Varma]: kid from Godavari hostel, IIT Madras will just listen to dark side of the moon and who's
[Amit Varma]: on a bit of a high and feeling good about life. And if you encounter him and you have
[Amit Varma]: to give him some life advice, uh, you know, what would you tell him that you wish someone
[Amit Varma]: had told you back then?
[Guest]: Oh, thank you. Uh, Hamid, thank you for having me on the show and all your kind words about,
[Guest]: uh, about my book. I'm happy we're doing this show. I'm happy that, you know, we are reaching
[Guest]: an audience talking about this. So let's say 20 year old, uh, Ambi will be probably sitting
[Guest]: in the Godavari common room, uh, after dinner with his good friend, God bless him, Joe Mariswamy,
[Guest]: listening to dark side of the moon for the 300th time. Right. I'll probably go and tell
[Guest]: him, yeah, start reading more, you know, uh, you know, enough of this dark side of the
[Guest]: moon, but, but I really don't, you know, I think, I think, uh, it was good because it
[Guest]: kind of widened the horizon. Uh, I would have probably told him and I, and I, I did good.
[Guest]: I should have told him this said, get your swimming, right? You know, you won't believe
[Guest]: it. I, you know, they built this beautiful Olympic size swimming pool in IIT Madras.
[Guest]: I went for a swim with my good friend, uh, Bala PD Bala, we call him and Joe. And I don't
[Guest]: know what happened. I almost sank. Right. And I kind of went down and the lifeguard
[Guest]: pulled me out. After that, I did not go into the pool. Right. And this has been nagging
[Guest]: in my head, you know, you know, swimming, swimming, you know, I've not learned swimming.
[Guest]: I'm always scared of depths, always scared of depths. So a year and a half ago, I said,
[Guest]: I've got to overcome that. And I got myself a personal trainer and now I can do, you know,
[Guest]: whatever 10 laps or 20 laps on, on Olympic size swimming pool without a problem. So I
[Guest]: would have told him that guy, get up tomorrow morning, go learn swimming. You know, I would
[Guest]: have told him that, but you know, finally I, I, I did, I did learn swimming. So that
[Amit Varma]: was good. That was very good.
[Amit Varma]: That's a, that's a pretty amazing answer because you have done so many different things in
[Amit Varma]: your life, but the one thing that you focused on now is the one thing that you did not do.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there's a lesson in this for all our young listeners that, uh, you know, don't,
[Amit Varma]: don't leave things undone. Just, just, just try everything, just go for it. And, uh, uh,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, if you aren't rejected, you're not trying hard enough. Amri, thank you once again for
[Guest]: coming on the show. It's been such a pleasure chatting.
[Guest]: Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Amit. Thank you, Amit, for having me on your fantastic
[Guest]: show and, uh, Seen and the Unseen. And I hope during the discussion, we have done a bit
[Guest]: of seen and unseen on the show. We've taken our listeners to some of the stuff they have
[Guest]: seen and probably many other stuff, which is unseen for them. So thank you very much.
[Guest]: And God bless you. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to your nearest bookstore
[Amit Varma]: online or offline and pick up any of Ambi's books, which I will also link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes. You can follow him on Twitter at Ambimgp. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-B-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for
[Unknown]: listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of the Seen and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to SeenUnseen.in slash support and contribute
[Unknown]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.